
--- PAGE 3 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 4 ---
TALMUD ESER SEFIROT
The Study of the Ten Sefirot
Volume Two
Preliminary Edition
Laitman Kabbalah Publishers, 2022
Copyright [c] 2022 by Laitman Kabbalah Publishers
1057 Steeles Avenue West, Suite 532
Toronto, ON M2R 3X1, Canada
All rights reserved.
Contact Information
E-mail: info@kabbalah.info
Website: www.kabbalah.info
Toll free in USA and Canada: 1-866-LAITMAN
1057 Steeles Avenue West, Suite 532, Toronto,
ON, M2R 3X1, Canada
No part of this book may be used or reproduced
in any manner without written permission of the publisher,
except in the case of brief quotations embodied
in critical articles or reviews.
ISBN: 9798362069599
Translation: Chaim Ratz
Content Editing: Shaul Dar
Editing and Proofreading: Mary Miesem
Cover Design: Inna Smirnova
Printing and Post Production: Uri Laitman
FIRST EDITION: November 2022
First printing
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 5 ---
C
ONTENTS
VOLUME 2
PART FIVE
Additional Explanation about the Matter of the Inversion of the Panim
and the Making Order of the Kelim
Table of Questions for Topics
Table of Questions for the Meaning of the Words
PART SIX
Histaklut Pnimit
Cause and Consequence
Table of Questions and Answers for the Meaning of the Words
Table of Questions for Topics
PART SEVEN
Histaklut Pnimit
Table of Questions for the Meaning of the Words
Table of Questions for Topics
PART EIGHT
PART SIXTEEN
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 6 ---
PART FIVE
Eser Sefirot de Akudim in the second Hitpashtut called Matei ve Lo
Matei
1. *3
2. 3
3. 4
4. 4
5. 6
6. *6
7. 9
8. 9
9. 10
10. 13
11. 15
12. 16
13. 17
14. 18
15. *19
16. 21
17. 21
18. 22
19. 22
20. 22
21. 23

--- PAGE 7 ---
22. 24
23. 24
24. 25
25. 26
26. 27
27. *28
28. 29
29. 29
30. 30
31. 31
32. 32
33. 33
34. 33
35. *33
36. 39
37. 39
38. 40
39. 41
40. 43
41. 49
42. 52
43. 54
44. 57
45. 58
46. 59
47. 63
48. 68
49. 69

--- PAGE 8 ---
50. * 72
51. 74
52. 75
53. 76
54. 76
55. * 77
56. 79
57. 79
58. 80
59. 80
60. 80
61. 82
62. 83

--- PAGE 9 ---
1. *Know, that since these Eser Sefirot are called Olam ha Akudim,
they are Orot and Anafim that came out of Peh de AK. It is known
that the Behinat Yod Sefirot in her will be inside her, in that Peh
itself.
Also, there are ten Shorashim there of these ten Sefirot that came
out, in the tenth Sefira in her, called the Malchut in her. These are
called Olam Akudim.
They are also called Eser Sefirot from Keter to Malchut. They are
Shorashim to these ten Sefirot de Akudim that came out for so it is
in all the Olamot.
Ohr Pnimi
1. There are ten Shorashim there…in the tenth Sefira…called the
Malchut in her.
We have already learned the matter of the Hitpashtut of each Partzuf.
The Ohr Elyon expands for Zivug de Hakaa on the Masach in Kli
Malchut first. This Ohr Hozer rises from the Masach upward and
clothes the Eser Sefirot in the Ohr Elyon, and this Halbasha is called
Eser Sefirot of Rosh.
Afterwards, Malchut expands through the Ohr Hozer that she raised to
Eser Sefirot from her and within her from above downward. This
Halbasha is called Guf, and in the Partzufim of AK they are called
Akudim.
You find that the Malchut with the Eser Sefirot of her Ohr Hozer
extend and emanate the Eser Sefirot of the Guf. That is why her Eser
Sefirot are called Shorashim to the Sefirot of the Guf.
2. It writes above that when the Orot left to the Maatzil Ohr Keter
remained in permanent Dvekut with the Maatzil and did not come.
The thing is that it stood there below Sefirat Malchut in the Eser
Sefirot, called Shorashim of the Akudim.
All these Eser are in Sefirat Malchut from the general Eser Sefirot
of the Peh of Adam Kadmon Himself. Thus, the Behinat Malchut in

--- PAGE 10 ---
the Eser above-mentioned Shorashim emanated these Eser Sefirot
called Akudim and is considered their Maatzil.
Ohr Pnimi
2. Stood there below Sefirat Malchut.
It has already been explained that Hitpashtut Aleph de Akudim was in
Komat Keter since the Zivug de Hakaa was there in the Masach in
Aviut Dalet. It is known that this Komat Keter did not come down
again in Hitpashtut Bet after it departed from Hitpashtut Aleph de
Akudim. Rather, it remained in its source, in the Maatzil, meaning
Malchut of Rosh, which is considered his Maatzil, as the Rav writes
here.
It is written, that he stood there below Sefirat Malchut, called
Shorashim de Akudim in the Eser Sefirot. In other words, this Komat
Keter that returned to the Maatzil, meaning to Malchut de Rosh is an
Anaf of Malchut. Hence, when he retuned to her he stands beneath her.
We must know the difference between Malchut de Rosh that owns the
Masach, where there is the Zivug de Hakaa and the Ohr Hozer, and
the Ohr Keter that rose. This is considered the same Ohr that had
already been clothed in the Kli, but then departed from there and is
now considered Ohr without a Kli, and remember that for all the rest.
3. Hence, all the aforementioned Shorashim face down to shine in
Olam Akudim through that Keter of Akudim that remained there
under the Malchut of the Shorashim, as mentioned above. Also,
the Keter Elyon of the Shorashim also yearns to bestow in the
Keter of Akudim that rose there.
This is so because the Shorashim always yearn to shine in the
Anafim, as they are their sons. They shine in them enough to
satisfy them so that the Anafim, which are their sons, will also
mate and produce posterity.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 11 ---
3. All the aforementioned Shorashim face down to shine in Olam
Akudim through that Keter.
It means that even after the Histalkut of the Akudim, the Kelim de
Akudim must receive Ohr from the Eser Sefirot of the Rosh in order to
revive them. This is a miniature luminescence that suffices only to
sustain them.
They need to receive this luminescence through the Ohr Keter that
stands under Malchut de Rosh. This is because the rule is that every
thing that comes and pours to the Partzuf is poured by the Sefirat
Keter of that Partzuf, as it is the Shoresh Elyon of those Eser Sefirot.
Hence, here too, even though the Ohr Keter has already left the
Partzuf the Kelim still cannot receive the He’arah for sustenance
except through the Ohr Keter that stands under the Malchut of Rosh.
The Keter Elyon of the Shorashim also yearns to bestow… …and
produce posterity.
It means that besides the vitality that the branches receive from their
Ohr Keter that stands under Malchut of the Rosh, they have a yearning
to give to the Shorashim Elyonim in the Rosh plentiful He’arah that
suffices for them to mate and produce progeny.
This lush He’arah is only given to them through the Keter Elyon of
the Shorashim, meaning through the Zivug in the Masach de Malchut
of Rosh that bestows upon the Ohr Keter that stands under that
Malchut. From there it is poured to the Anafim, as we shall see ahead.
4. The Anaf also wishes to receive He’arah and suck from the
Shorashim. Hence, both the Zachar and the Nekeva in the Kli of
Keter of the Upper Anafim rise upward under the Keter, which
rose under Malchut of the Shorashim and there receive their
He’arah from Him.
Once they receive all that they need the Keter of the Anafim, which
always stands there, now turns His face from them upward to the
Shorashim, and His Achoraim facing the above Zachar and
Nekeva.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Ohr Pnimi
4. The Zachar and the Nekeva in the Kli of Keter of the Upper
Anafim.
They are the Reshimo de Keter with the Reshimo de Behina Gimel
contained in the Masach that rose and departed from Hitpashtut Aleph
to the Malchut of Rosh (explained in Part 4, Chap 4, Ohr Pnimi item
50).
Behina Dalet did not leave a Reshimo. Where then did the Reshimo de
Komat Keter come here from? Indeed, every Behina consists of two
kinds of Reshimot. There is Reshimo de Hamshacha, which belongs to
the bottom Behina of the degree, and there is Behinat Reshimo of
Hitlabshut Ohr, which belongs to the Upper Behina in the Koma of
the degree. (In that regard see Part 4, Histaklut Pnimit item 41).
These two Reshimot are as Zachar and Nukva. The Reshimo de
Hitlabshut is the Behinat Zachar in the Reshimo, and the Reshimo de
Hamshacha is the Behinat Nekeva in the Reshimo.
Know, that only the Behinat Nekeva in the Reshimo de Behina Dalet,
which belongs to Malchut disappeared. However, the Behinat Zachar
of the Reshimo that belongs to Keter remained and is contained in the
Masach that rose to the Malchut of Rosh.
Rise upward… …and there receive their He’arah from Him.
The ascent is performed through the Hizdakchut of the Masach in
Tabur de Hitpashtut Aleph until it becomes as pure as the Maatzil,
meaning Malchut de Rosh, since the Hishtavut Tzura unites the
spirituals into one. Since the Masach de Guf becomes as Zach as the
Masach of the Rosh, it is considered to have risen and united into one
with it, in its place.
It is known that Histalkut is not conducted in the Rosh at all. Rather,
the Masach there is always in a Zivug de Lo Pasik with the Ohr Elyon.
Hence, the Masach that rose there was also incorporated in its Zivug
and receives from the Ohr Elyon together with it.

--- PAGE 13 ---
It is written, “both the Zachar and the Nekev… …rise upward etc.
under Malchut of the Shorashim and there receive their He’arah
from Him.” In other words, by incorporating in the Zivug Elyon there.
Once they receive all that they need.
It means until they became suitable to expand to their place to the Guf
with this He’arah that they received.
Now turns His face from them upward.
It means that the Zivug that belongs to the Ohr Keter stops. At that
time it stops its He’arah from expanding to the ZON below it. This is
called that its Achoraim is opposite the ZON because the prevention of
He’arah is called Achor.
The reason for the cessation of his He’arah will be explained below. It
is because the Zivug reached the Nukva contained in the Reshimo,
which is Aviut de Behina Gimel that extends only from Komat
Hochma of the Shorashim Elyonim, not from the Keter de Shorashim.
Therefore the Ohr Keter below Malchut does not receive any more
Ohr for the ZON beneath it. After the above Zivug de Behina Gimel is
performed, the Zachar and Nekeva immediately expand to the Guf, to
the Kli de Keter found there and the second Hitpashtut de Akudim
occurs.
5. The reason that they have to rise up is that these Kelim of Akudim
are the first Kelim that were emanated. No Kelim were emanated
above them since the Ohr there is enormous and the Kelim cannot
exist there.
Hence, if the Ohr Elyon had extended down to their place when
they are in their Kelim, the Kelim would have been annulled. Thus
it was necessary that only the Orot of the ZON in the Kli would
rise up.
Ohr Pnimi
5. These Kelim of Akudim are the first Kelim.

--- PAGE 14 ---
This means the Kelim of the first Hitpashtut when the Zachar and
Nekeva of Keter rose from there (see above Part 4, Chap 1 item 5).
If the Ohr Elyon had extended down… …the Kelim would have
been annulled.
It means that if Komat Keter had expanded back to the Kelim as it first
was, before the its Histalkut, the Kelim made during the Histalkut
would have been annulled again for the reason the Rav mentioned
above (Part 4, Chap 6 item 3).
It was necessary that only the Orot of the ZON in the Kli would
rise up.
These ZON de Keter that rose above the Masach that purified have
only Aviut de Behina Gimel. Hence, they extend only Komat Hochma
and Ohr Hochma clothes Kli de Keter, Ohr Bina in Kli de Hochma
etc.
It turns out that each Kli lacks much of the measure of Ohr meant for
it. Kli de Keter now has only Ohr Hochma, which is much lower than
it. Also, Kli Hochma has only Ohr Bina etc. Because of that the Aviut
became apparent in the Kelim in a way that they could not be
annulled.
6. *Now we shall explain the existence of this ascent. It is said that
when Lo Matei in the Keter, since ZON of the Keter rise up to the
place of this Keter at the end of the Shorashim Elyonim, they
cannot be together there because He is greater than them.
Hence, they remain in His place and He rises to the place of
Shoresh of Malchut. Then the Shoresh of Malchut also rises to the
Shoresh of Yesod where they both remain as Yesod, which is ZON.
Then, Shoresh Keter Elyon gives below after there is already a
preparation for the Tachtonim to receive. At that time the Nukva
of Keter is incorporated in the Zachar.
Ohr Pnimi
6. Lo Matei in the Keter, since ZON of the Keter rise up.

--- PAGE 15 ---
The matter of Histalkut Komat Keter de Hitpashtut Aleph is called Lo
Matei in Keter. This is the matter of Histalkut ZON of the Keter
upward, meaning they rise there to be incorporated in the Zivug Elyon
in the Malchut of the Rosh.
This has already been explained elaborately in Part 4, chapter 4, Ohr
Pnimi item 50 and study it there. I shall only bring an extract of it here
sufficiently to explain the Rav’s words here.
It explains there that the whole reason for the Histalkut Orot from
Hitpashtut Aleph de Akudim was only because of the ascent of
Malchut, meaning the Hizdakchut of the Masach in Kli Malchut.
When Malchut rose to ZA, which is Behina Gimel, Komat Keter
disappeared.
Afterwards, when it too rose from the Kli of Keter to the Maatzil,
meaning to Malchut of Rosh, the entire Ohr of that Hitpashtut
disappeared. Thus, all these Orot that departed from there left
Reshimot after them in their Kelim, except Malchut, meaning Behina
Dalet who did not leave any Reshimo after her departure.
It is also explained there that Malchut, meaning the Masach in her, is
incorporated in the Reshimot that the Orot left behind in those
Behinot, when it purifies and ascends from Behina to Behina. It is so
because when the Masach purified from Behina Dalet to Behina
Gimel, which is the Kli de ZA, it mingles with the Reshimo that
remains there from the Ohr ZA after its Histalkut.
Also, when it rose to Hochma, it mingled with the Reshimo de
Hochma, and when it rose to Keter it mingled in the Reshimo de
Keter. Afterwards, when it rose from the Keter to the Maatzil the
Masach is found to be containing all the Reshimot that exist in the
Eser Sefirot de Hitpashtut Aleph except the Reshimo de Behina Dalet.
This is because it disappeared even from the Malchut de Hitpashtut
Aleph itself.
Know, that the essence of those Reshimot contained in the Masach are
the very Aviut of Behina Gimel that remained from Komat Hochma. It
is also Aviut from Behina Dalet from the perspective of the Hitlabshut,

--- PAGE 16 ---
remaining from Komat Keter. This is because the Reshimot from the
Komot that are lower than them are incorporated in the Upper
Reshimot.
You should know that these two above Reshimot can still be a single
degree although Komat Keter is far more valuable than Komat
Hochma, but with a differentiation of Zachar and Nekeva. This is
because the Reshimo of Komat Keter is only half a Reshimo.
Moreover, it lacks that most important half.
It is already presented above that each Reshimo is discerned by two:
Reshimo de Hamshacha and Reshimo de Hitlabshut. This means that
the measure of the Koma is measured by the measure of the Aviut in
the Masach, where the more Av draws a higher Koma.
However, since the higher Koma needs a purer Kli, we come to find
two opposite ends in each Koma, set one atop the other. On the one
hand, the greater Koma must have the most Av Masach and Kli, which
are the Kelim for Hamshacha for the great Koma. On the other hand, it
must have the finest vessels of reception to fit the clothing of the
greatest Ohr.
Hence, each of these Reshimot that remained from Hitpashtut Aleph is
evaluated by the two above halves, the Reshimo de Hamshacha and
the Reshimo de Hitlabshut. Know, that the Reshimo de Hamshacha is
the most important, as this is what the Zivug Elyon is made on. Also,
the Ohr Hozer that connects and clothes the Ohr Elyon in the Partzuf
rises from it.
From the explanation you can thoroughly understand why the
Reshimo de Komat Keter with the Reshimo de Komat Hochma are
considered Zachar and Nukva. It seems very puzzling since it is
known that Zachar and Nekeva should be equal to each other.
Otherwise how will they have contact with each other, how will they
affect and receive from one another?
Here, the Zachar will be from Komat Keter and the Nekeva from
Komat Hochma and the value of Keter is known to be far greater than
Keter. We learned that the Reshimo de Komat Keter is only half a

--- PAGE 17 ---
Reshimo, and the weaker half too since it is unfit to draw the Ohr on
its own.
Yet, the Reshimo de Behina Gimel is a complete Reshimo, both from
the perspective of the Hamshacha, and from the perspective of the
Hitlabshut. Hence, you find that the complete Reshimo de Behina
Gimel equalizes with the half Reshimo de Komat Keter. Understand
that and remember it through the rest here.
We will explain below how these Zachar and Nekeva connect with the
Masach in Malchut of Rosh in one Zivug because of their ascent there.
For that reason they return and extend Hitpashtut Ohr Elyon to the
Partzuf once more. This is named Hitpashtut Bet.
It is written, “when Lo Matei in the Keter, since ZON of the Keter rise
up etc. Then, Shoresh Keter Elyon gives below.” It is as we’ve written
above that when Lo Matei in Keter, meaning in Hitpashtut Aleph,
generally called Keter, Behinat Zachar and Nekeva rise from that
Komat Keter.
The Zachar is discerned as the Reshimo de Keter of Komat Keter and
the Nekeva is discerned as the Reshimo de Hochma of that Komat
Keter. They rise under Malchut de Rosh and are renewed there in a
new Zivug as he will explain henceforth.
They remain in His place… …the Shoresh of Malchut also rises to
the Shoresh of Yesod.
Here you must know this rule, that the ascent of the Anafim means the
Hizdakchut of the Aviut in them, which causes the ascent of their
Shorashim. Even though Hizdakchut does not apply in the Shorashim,
which are the Eser Sefirot de Rosh, still the ascent of the Shorashim
extends from the Hizdakchut in the Anafim themselves.
This is because the Anafim relate to the Shorashim as the “actual to
the potential”. In fact, they are one entity and the actual has only what
is in the potential. Hence, if there is any manifestation of the Anafim,
which are Sefirot de Guf, that manifestation must first appear in the
Eser Sefirot of the Shorashim.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Thus, it is true that this matter of Hizdakchut and Histalkut Orot from
their Hitlabshut in the Kelim cannot occur in the Eser Sefirot de Rosh.
This is because the Hitlabshut Orot in the Kelim is essentially only in
potential there. However, the matter of the ascent of the place of the
Zivug is certainly there though it occurred because of the ascent of the
Anafim there.
This concept is among the most important in this wisdom. He
elaborates on this matter below in all its details, but here he speaks in
general. He says that the ascent of ZON of Komat Keter de Guf below
Malchut of the Rosh causes the Hitkalelut Ohr Keter in the Behinat
Kli Malchut of the Rosh.
These two mixtures are: Hitkalelut ZON de Keter of the Guf under
Malchut de Rosh in the place of Ohr Keter de Guf, and the Hitkalelut
Ohr Keter of the Guf in Kli Malchut itself. They cause the Shoresh de
Malchut, meaning the Masach contained in Kli Malchut of the Rosh,
to rise to the place of the Shoresh of Yesod, meaning the Aviut de
Behina Gimel.
Shoresh Keter Elyon gives below.
This is refers to abundant bestowal by way of Zivug to produce
progeny which are the Eser Sefirot de Hitpashtut Bet called Partzuf
AB de AK, considered a progeny and the son of the first Partzuf de
AK.
Preparation for the Tachtonim to receive.
This means the Tikun of the Masach to be suitable and fitting to mate
with the Ohr Elyon.
The Nukva of Keter is incorporated in the Zachar.
It means that this Zivug is not done on the Reshimo de Behina Gimel,
which is the Behinat Nekeva. Rather, it is done on the Behinat
Reshimo de Behina Dalet, which is the Behinat Zachar de Keter.
However, the Nekeva is incorporated in the He’arat Zivug with it, as
we will explain below.

--- PAGE 19 ---
7. Interpretation: There are several rules: One, when two Orot are in
two Kelim, each on its own. Afterwards, when the two Orot enter
one Kli, it will be called Klalut (from the word Kolel – containing).
This is because they are contained in one another in one Kli.
There is yet another reality. Since these two Behinot Orot Zachar
and Nekeva are in two Kelim, what happens to them is what is
written in Parashat Truma, as then there is AHaVaH in them. This
means that the He’arah of the Zachar is incorporated in the
Nekeva and both are in one Kli.
Also, the He’arat Nukva returns to be contained in the Kli of the
Zachar. Thus they are four Orot, two in each Kli, intermingled.
This is the meaning of the four Otiot of AHaVaH.
Ohr Pnimi
7. One, when two Orot are in two Kelim etc. contained in one another
in one Kli.
Interpretation: Any spiritual separation is through Shinui Tzura and
any spiritual unification is through Hishtavut Tzura. Hence, if for
example one Ohr is clothed in Behina Dalet and the other in Behina
Gimel they are considered two. This is because the Shinui Tzura
separates between them. They are considered two separate Orot in two
Kelim in themselves.
However, when the Kli de Behina Dalet is purified and remains in
Behina Gimel too, the two Kelim mingle and become one Kli, since
both are in even Tzura. The two Orot are also mingled in their
He’arah. Even though they both originate from the Eser Sefirot de
Ohr Yashar, they are two kinds, such as one being Ruach and the other
is Nefesh.
Two Orot are in two Kelim etc. Then there is AhaVaH.
This refers to the Zivug de Neshikin and will be explained in its place.
8. There is yet another kind of Klalut. This is the reality we are in,
which are two Orot without Kelim, which are ZON of the Keter
that rose up and are not in the Kli. It is because then their Klalut

--- PAGE 20 ---
would be in the form of receiving He’arah from one another, and
this is their Klalut.
Ohr Pnimi
8. The reality we are in, which are two Orot without Kelim.
Here the Zachar and the Nekeva are considered in ascent because of
the Hizdakchut of the Masach from all the Aviut that was in it, as it
completely equalized its form with the Maatzil.
These Zachar and Nekeva de Keter are nothing but silent Reshimot
that have no Aviut at all. Yet, they were first in Behinat Hitlabshut in
the Guf, one in Komat Keter de Guf and the other in Komat Hochma
in the Guf. Hence, we call them Zachar and Nekeva.
This is the precision that the Rav makes for us here, “which are two
Orot without Kelim, which are ZON of the Keter that rose up.” This
means that these ZON have nothing of the Behinat Kelim since they
are considered to be in ascent.
9. Now the Nukva is contained in the Dechura since the Nukva is Ohr
Hochma and the Zachar is Ohr of Keter that remained in the Kli.
Hence, it is the Zachar that now receives from its Shoresh, the
Shoresh of Keter.
This extends to it by purifying that Keter that remained above at
the end of the Shorashim; it is greatly purified by the Upper
He’arah of the Shoresh of Keter. Then, a great Ohr shines in that
Zachar of the Keter and the Nekeva is incorporated in the Zachar
and receives He’arah from it until these three Behinot are even in
their He’arah.
They are the Zachar and Nekeva of the Kli Keter and that Keter
that is on them. Once they are even, they will receive their Ohr
from the Shoresh of the Keter Elyon.
Ohr Pnimi
9. The Nukva is Ohr Hochma.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Meaning, it is the Behinat Reshimo that left Ohr Komat Hochma after
its Histalkut.
The Zachar is Ohr of Keter that remained in the Kli.
This refers to the Behinat Reshimo that the Ohr of Komat Keter left
after its Histalkut when it remained in Kli de Komat Keter. Now it
rose to the Maatzil through the Masach that was purified.
This extends to it by purifying that Keter that remained above at
the end of the Shorashim.
Here the Rav gives us a complete order of Zivug and birth of a lower
Partzuf by the Upper One. Hence, we must know these things for a
very accurate understanding.
He wrote that these Reshimot that rose from the Histalkut de
Hitpashtut Aleph are the Reshimo from the Ohr that remains in Kli de
Hochma. They rose under Malchut of the Rosh to the place where the
general Ohr of Komat Keter of Hitpashtut Aleph was after its
Histalkut from there.
It turns out that here in Malchut of the Rosh, we have three kinds of
Orot of the Guf de Partzuf Aleph of AK that emerged after the
Histalkut and came to the Rosh of that Partzuf. These are the general
Komat Keter of the Guf and the Reshimo that that Komat Keter left in
the Kli de Keter of the Guf after its Histalkut.
Afterwards it too rose to the Rosh by its Hitkalelut in the Masach de
Malchut de Guf that ascended. That Reshimo is called Zachar de Kli
de Keter.
We must understand that this Reshimo is an Anaf of the general Komat
Keter mentioned above. Indeed, it is more of a branch since it is an
actual part of Atzmuto. The only difference between them is that the
general Ohr de Komat Keter was removed from the Guf entirely
immediately after the Masach purified from the Aviut de Behina
Dalet. The Reshimo is that part that it left there in its Kli, and thus you
find that they are one Atzmut.

--- PAGE 22 ---
There is yet another (second) Reshimo here, namely the Ohr that the
Ohr of Komat Hochma of the Guf de AK left inside its Kli after its
Histalkut from that Guf. It is called the Nekeva of the Keter since it
too rose from her Kli de Guf to the Rosh by her Hitkalelut in the
Masach that was purified.
We have already elaborated on that in Part 4, Chap 4 Ohr Pnimi item
50. We must scrutinize thoroughly well there for all the things from
there should have been copied here had I not spared the length. Hence,
I am being very brief here.
Remember these three names of the three Orot well. They are: Zachar
de Keter, Nekeva de Keter, and Ohr Keter, according to their above
explanation because it is impossible to explain them every time. Also,
remember that all these three Orot are Anafim of Malchut de Rosh
since she brought them out to the Guf by the force of the Shinui Tzura
and the Aviut Guf that she gave them, called Aviut from above
downward.
Now that they have purified from this Aviut once more they have
returned to her once more and were incorporated in her as in the
beginning. This is considered that the three Orot rose to the place of
Malchut de Rosh.
However, their order of positioning there is considered that every Anaf
stands under its proximate Shoresh. This is because the Ohr Keter,
which is the general Ohr that rose and departed from the Guf is the
closest to Malchut.
The Zachar de Keter stands behind it since it is a branch of the Ohr
Keter, which is the Reshimo that the Ohr Keter left in its Kli. The
Nekeva de Keter stands behind, as she is from Behinat Aviut de Behina
Gimel, being a branch of the Zachar de Keter, which is from Behina
Dalet.
Know, that the ascents of Zachar and Nekeva de Keter to the Rosh
caused two Zivugim by this ascent. The Masach and the Malchut of
the Rosh immediately rose to the Yesod de Rosh. It means that

--- PAGE 23 ---
Malchut left the Behina Dalet in her and acquired the Aviut de Behina
Gimel of the Rosh.
The reason for her ascent is that the Histalkut Orot de Hitpashtut
Aleph of the Guf caused a cessation of the bestowal of Malchut de
Rosh since she no longer had anyone to give to. The whole matter of
Malchut de Rosh stands only for bestowal, as she is not fitting for
reception from the Tzimtzum onward.
Instead, she raises Ohr Hozer through the Zivug de Hakaa that occurs
in her. Through that Ohr Hozer she raises she gives and extends the
Ohr Elyon into the Guf. Thus, during the Histalkut of the Orot de Guf
she cannot give to the Guf but only a restricted bestowal, sufficient
only to sustain the Kelim de Guf so that they are not completely
annulled.
Hence, when the Masach and the Reshimot de ZON de Keter in it
returned to the place of Malchut where the Zivug did not stop, they
immediately condense in the Behinat Aviut de Rosh in the entire
measure contained in the Reshimot.
Since Behina Dalet did not leave a Reshimo they could not because
more Av than the measure of Aviut de Behina Gimel. It is considered
that she rose to the place of Yesod to make a new Zivug de Hakaa
there on Masach de Behina Gimel.
Thus, the Nekeva de Keter can receive her bestowal. This is one Zivug
that the ZON induced by their ascent to the Rosh.
However, there is Reshimo de Behina Dalet here too though it is from
Behinat Hitlabshut, meaning Behinat Zachar de Keter. In itself, that
Reshimo is fitting for extension of the Ohr through it, meaning to
make a Zivug de Hakaa with the Ohr Elyon, to raise Ohr Hozer and
the Ohr Hozer will draw the Ohr to it. Despite that, it is fitting to
connect with the Nekeva, meaning Aviut de Hamshacha, and examine
that thoroughly.
Thus, Malchut de Rosh made a Behinat Zivug de Hakaa here on the
common Aviut from Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut and from Behina

--- PAGE 24 ---
Gimel de Hamshacha. By that she raised Ohr Hozer up to Komat
Keter of the Rosh since she was aided by the Aviut de Behina Dalet of
Hitlabshut.
Thus we have thoroughly explained the two Zivugim that the ascents
of ZON de Keter induced in the Malchut de Rosh by their ascent and
Hitkalelut in her: The first is the Zivug on the common Aviut from
Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut and Behina Gimel of Hamshacha. In this
Zivug she extended Komat Keter de Rosh. The second is the Zivug on
the Aviut de Behina Gimel only. In this Zivug she extends merely
Komat Hochma of Rosh.
From the explained thus far you will thoroughly understand the Rav’s
words here in item six. He says, “ZON of the Keter rise up to the
place of this Keter at the end of the Shorashim Elyonim.”
This means that so is their presence in the Rosh measured, each Anaf
under its Shoresh; the Nekeva under the Zachar and the Zachar under
the Ohr Keter (see Ohr Pnimi this imem, par. “Remember”). It is
written, “He rises to the place of Shoresh of Malchut,” and then the
Shoresh of Malchut also rises in the Shoresh of the Yesod where they
both remain as Yesod, which is ZON.
This means that in order to bestow to the ZON de Keter that rose she
leaves her Behina Dalet, namely the place of Malchut of Rosh and
receives the Aviut de Behina Gimel which is the place of Yesod of the
Rosh.
However, note that the Rav is precise in saying “they both remain as
Yesod, which is ZON.” This indicates the difference here. In several
places where the Malchut rises to Yesod the Yesod rises to the Sefira
above it. This is because Malchut acquired Aviut de Behina Gimel and
the Zivug that emerges on Aviut de Behina Gimel extends merely
Komat Hochma.
At that time the Ohr Hochma comes in Kli de Keter, the Bina in Kli de
Hochma, ZA in Kli de Bina and Malchut in Kli de ZA. Here, however,
the ZA did not rise to Kli de Bina, but they both remained as Yesod, as
the Rav says.

--- PAGE 25 ---
The reason for it is thoroughly explained with the above words
“However, there is Reshimo”. Here there was a common Zivug from
Aviut de Hitlabshut of Behina Dalet with the Aviut de Hamshacha de
Behina Gimel that the Malchut de Rosh was mixed with by the Zachar
and the Nekeva de Keter that rose in her.
Because of this association with Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut a Zivug
de Hakaa was made in her extending Komat Keter of the Rosh. Hence,
the Ohr Keter comes in its Kli and the Sefirot did not change their
places.
Naturally, the Yesod also remained in its Kli along with the Malchut
that rose to it. Thus, now there are two Orot together in the Kli of
Yesod. They are also the connection Zachar and Nekeva, meaning its
own Ohr, which is Zachar and the Ohr Malchut, which is Nekeva.
That is why it is written, “which is ZON.”
It is written, “Then, Shoresh Keter Elyon gives below after there is
already a preparation for the Tachtonim to receive.” It means that
the Koma that emerges by that common Zivug is Komat Keter of the
Rosh.
Hence, Shoresh Keter Elyon, meaning Keter de Rosh gives below to
the Ohr Keter, which is contained in Kli Malchut. From the Ohr Keter
that Ohr comes to his Reshimo, called Zachar de Kli de Keter. From
the Zachar the Ohr reaches the Nukva de Kli de Keter since the three
of them are mingled together.
It is written, “At that time the Nukva of Keter is incorporated in the
Zachar.” It means that the unique Zivug for her was not done in
Malchut de Rosh, namely the above second Zivug on Aviut de Behina
Gimel alone. Rather, it is mingled together with the Reshimo de
Hitlabshut of the Zachar; and examine that thoroughly.
It is written here in item nine, “This extends to it by purifying that
Keter that remained above at the end of the Shorashim.” There is a
very important concept here.

--- PAGE 26 ---
The Zivug that is made here now is Zivug Elyon de Rosh. Thus, how
will the Ohr Keter be mingled in this Zivug, which is an Ohr that has
already clothed the Aviut of the Guf, which is very far from the
Behinat Rosh? This is what the Rav tells us here, “This extends to it
by purifying that Keter.”
This means that the Masach de Guf rose and was purified from any
Aviut in the Guf until it rose to the Rosh. Hence, the entire Behinat Guf
contained in the Ohr Keter had been completely sucked out. It became
just as Zach as Behinat Rosh and therefore mingled in the Malchut in
the Zivug de Rosh and received the Ohr of Keter of the Rosh and
poured upon the ZON de Kli de Keter.
The Nekeva is incorporated in the Zachar.
As it is written in the previous item, her Behina Gimel mingled and
participated with the Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut of the Zachar. After
that she departed from this participation since Malchut de Rosh made
a special Zivug on the Behina Gimel of the Nekeva, as he explains
below.
These three Behinot are even in their He’arah. They will receive
their Ohr from the Shoresh of the Keter Elyon.
The three of them were incorporated in this Zivug of Malchut de Rosh
in the common Masach from the Aviut of Hitlabshut of Behina Dalet
with the Aviut of Hamshacha de Behina Gimel. The Ohr Hozer that
rose from here clothed through Komat Keter Elyon, namely Keter de
Rosh.
In addition, the matter of the Hitkalelut of these three Orot has already
been explained above. Each Anaf is incorporated in its proximate
Shoresh, meaning the Nukva de Keter in the Zachar de Keter, the
Zachar de Keter in the Ohr Keter, and the Ohr Keter in Malchut.
10. The Nukva of the Keter must also receive from her Shoresh Elyon,
which is the Upper Hochma. Hence, the Shoresh of the Upper
Hochma descends in Bina, Bina in Hesed etc. until Yesod descends
in Malchut.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Afterwards, that Keter, which rose to the place of Shoresh of
Malchut, descends in His place. He cannot be there since He has
no similarity with the Shoresh of Malchut. In addition, He is a
branch and Malchut is a Shoresh. Hence, although He receives
from Keter, He is worse than her.
However, He comes down to His place and can there be together
with ZON that were in His place. This is so because then they are
all equal, having received equally from the Shoresh of the Keter
Elyon.
Ohr Pnimi
10. The Nukva of the Keter must also receive from her Shoresh Elyon.
Interpretation: This great Zivug that was made on the common
Masach of the Zachar and the Nukva together that extended the great
Ohr de Keter Elyon remained entirely in the Rosh. It cannot expand to
the Guf because the Behinat Aviut of Hamshacha de Behina Dalet is
absent there.
This matter of the association that was made with the Behinat
Hamshacha de Behina Dalet and the matter of the association that was
made with the Hamshacha de Behina Gimel was enough for the Eser
Sefirot of the Rosh. This is so because there is no actual Behinat
Hitlabshut in them. However, it is not enough for actual Hitlabshut
inside the Guf.
Hence, the Behinat Aviut de Hitlabshut awakened in the Zachar de Kli
de Keter to expand with this great Ohr into actual Behinat Hitlabshut,
meaning to clothe in the Eser Sefirot de Guf. Because of that the
Behinat Guf contained in the Ohr Keter that stands at the place of
Malchut de Rosh immediately became apparent.
Along with it His Tzura became different from the Malchut de Rosh.
In that it is considered to have instantly become separated from the
Malchut and left there to His place, as the Shinui Tzura separates and
departs the spirituals from one another.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Since He left the place of Malchut, you find that he immediately
separated from the Ohr of the Keter Elyon and only the previous
restricted He’arah remained in Him. It is called that the Ohr Keter
returned His face upward and His posterior downward.
He writes, “The Nukva of the Keter must also receive from her
Shoresh Elyon.” It means that the Zivug is not completed by the great
Zivug de Komat Keter Elyon for its He’arah does not expand to the
Guf. Thus, there is a need for the Zivug made on the Behinat Nekeva
de Keter, meaning the complete Aviut de Behina Gimel both from the
Behinat Hamshacha and from the Behinat Hitlabshut.
From her Shoresh Elyon, which is the Upper Hochma.
It is written above that the Reshimo that remained from Komat
Hochma de Hitpashtut Aleph after its Histalkut is Behinat Aviut de
Behina Gimel. It is made here into Behinat Nukva de Keter and it is
the source of this second Hitpashtut.
Hence, the Shoresh of the Upper Hochma descends in Bina, Bina
in Hesed etc.
The Behinat Zivug made on the Behinat Nekeva de Keter, which is
Behina Gimel, causes the descent of the degrees from Rosh to Sof.
Keter descends to the degree of Hochma, Hochma descends to the
degree of Bina, Bina descends to the degree of Hesed etc. Finally,
Yesod descends to the degree of Malchut.
The reason for it is that this Zivug occurs on Aviut de Behina Gimel. It
does not raise Ohr Hozer and extends only Komat Hochma. Hence,
with regard to this Zivug, you find that the Ohr Hochma descends and
clothes Kli de Keter.
It is considered that the Keter descended from its degree and came to
the degree of Hochma. Similarly, Ohr Bina clothes Kli de Hochma
and Sefirat Hochma descends to the degree of Bina etc. until Ohr
Malchut clothes Kli de Yesod and the Yesod descends to the degree of
Malchut.

--- PAGE 29 ---
That Keter etc. since He has no similarity with the Shoresh of
Malchut.
During the ascent of the Masach and the Sefirot up to the Maatzil,
meaning they purified from the Behinat Aviut de Guf entirely, meaning
from above downward. By that they have come to Hishtavut Tzura
with Malchut de Rosh.
Thus, it is considered that the Ohr de Komat Keter that rose from the
Guf came to the place of Malchut since it is then as Zach as Malchut
and there is no disparity of form between them, as the Rav says (item
9). He wrote, “This extends to it by purifying that Keter that
remained above at the end of the Shorashim” (see Ohr Pnimi item
9).
However, afterwards this first above Zivug that extended the Komat
Keter Elyon has been completed in the form of from below upward as
it is in the Rosh. Then came His time to turn around and expand from
above downward too for Hitlabshut in the Guf as it is in all the
Zivugim.
At that time the Ohr Keter in the place of Malchut de Rosh awakened
to expand to the Guf once more as it was there to begin with.
However, the Behinat Nukva of the Rosh was not in her place in
Behina Dalet since the Behina Dalet de Behinat Hamshacha was
missing there (Ohr Pnimi item 10). Thus, she could not expand from
above downward to Eser Sefirot from her and within her through the
Tabur de Guf, and all this great Ohr of this Zivug remained in the
Rosh.
Still, because the Ohr Keter had awakened to return and expand in the
Guf as in the beginning, even though it did not return, it still caused
this awakening to disclose the Aviut de Guf from the time it was there
in the beginning. Since the Aviut de Guf appeared in it, its Tzura has
changed form that of Malchut of Rosh. He no longer has any
semblance to her since He has grown as far from her as the Guf is far
from the Rosh.

--- PAGE 30 ---
He writes, “Afterwards, that Keter, which rose to the place of
Shoresh of Malchut, descends in His place. He cannot be there
since He has no similarity with the Shoresh of Malchut. In
addition, He is a branch and Malchut is a Shoresh.” It means that
after the Zivug is completed the Aviut de Guf awakened in Him and
His Tzura was changed from Malchut until He had no likeness with
her.
Hence, He was completed to descend from there and return to His
place. It is written, “for this is a root and that is a branch.” This is
because the Behinat Guf is a branch and the Behinat Rosh is a
Shoresh.
He comes down to His place.
It is below Kli Malchut of the Rosh, meaning intermediate between
Rosh and Guf. This is because it cannot descend and expand to the Guf
since the Nukva of the Rosh does not expand in her Eser Sefirot de
Ohr Hozer to become Kelim to clothe Him, as written in the previous
item. He also cannot be in the Rosh because of the above Shinui
Tzura. Hence, He is regarded as intermediate between them.
They are all equal, having received equally from the Shoresh of
the Keter Elyon.
Before the second Zivug was made on the Masach de Aviut from
Behina Gimel only on the Behinat Nekeva de Keter, the Nekeva was
still mingled with the Behina Dalet of the Zachar and the Zachar de
Keter was contained in the Ohr Keter. Hence, now the three of them
are equal in their reception from the Keter Elyon, meaning what they
still receive from Komat Keter of Rosh.
11. At that time the He’arat Shoresh Hochma extends below and the
Zachar is incorporated in the Nukva. The Nukva receives first
since she equalizes in virtue with the Zachar and they both receive
from the Shoresh of the Keter Elyon equally.
Since they now receive from Shoresh Hochma, the Nukva first
receives from all three here. They receive from her and

--- PAGE 31 ---
incorporate in her, as it is written, “A virtuous woman is a crown
to her husband.”
Ohr Pnimi
11. At that time the He’arat Shoresh Hochma extends below.
It means that the Zivug is made on the Masach of Behina Gimel of the
Malchut de Rosh without the participation of the Aviut de Hamshacha
de Behina Dalet. At that time the Ohr Hozer that ascends from below
upward attains no more than Komat Keter Elyon, but only up to
Komat Upper Hochma of the Rosh. It is written about that, “At that
time the He’arat Shoresh Hochma extends below,” meaning the
Hochma of the Rosh.
The Zachar is incorporated in the Nukva etc. receive from the
Shoresh of the Keter Elyon equally.
Interpretation: now that the Zivug is made on Masach de Behina
Gimel that extends only Komat Hochma of the Rosh, you find that the
Ohr Hochma of the Rosh clothed the Behinat Kli de Keter of the Rosh.
Keter and Hochma were incorporated in one another in the Rosh too.
It follows that the Zachar, which is Reshimo de Komat Keter, and the
Nekeva, being Reshimo de Komat Hochma, were also intermingled,
and the Zachar receives the Ohr Zivug of the Nekeva.
It is written, “The Nukva receives first since she equalizes in virtue
with the Zachar and they both receive from the Shoresh of the
Keter Elyon equally.” Also, now that the Ohr Hochma came to Kli de
Keter of the Rosh they receive from the Kli de Keter too, both of them
equally.
The Nukva first receives from all three here. They receive from
her etc.
This means that in the beginning, in the first Zivug, extending Komat
Keter of the Rosh, the Ohr Zivug belonged to the Ohr Keter that rose
from the Guf to Malchut de Rosh. However, Nukva did not have any
connection to this Ohr de Keter Elyon since she is the Reshimo de
Komat Hochma.

--- PAGE 32 ---
It follows, that Nukva receives from all of these three Orot because of
her Hitkalelut in them. Now, however, when the Zivug is made on her
Behina, namely Behina Gimel, the Nukva is found to be the primer
receiver of the three Orot. This is so because the other two do not
belong to Komat Hochma but receive from it.
12. Yet, the reasons for the descent of the Shoresh Hochma below in
the place of the Shoresh Bina etc. are several. The first is that
when she is near the Shoresh Keter she cannot shine below and her
Ohr is annulled in the Ohr that extends from Keter.
Moreover, she must draw nearer down so that Nukva in the Keter
may receive from Him first. This causes the closeness of the
Shoresh to her on degree more than the closeness of the Zachar in
Keter to His Shoresh.
In addition, we have explained that the Shorashim never cease
giving below since the Tachtonim want to receive. Hence, the
Shoresh of Keter does not stop pouring down the whole time ZON
are outside their Kli.
It follows, that reason Hochma cannot bestow. Thus, when
Hochma departs and descends below to the place of Bina, her
place will remain vacant. While the Shefa pours from the Shoresh
of Keter fills that vacant Halal, Hochma pours below. It follows,
that then even if Keter bestows, He does not revoke the He’arat
Hochma.
Ohr Pnimi
12. She is near the Shoresh Keter she cannot shine below and her Ohr
is annulled in the Ohr that extends from Keter.
It means that if the degrees had not descended but the Ohr Keter
would be in Kli de Keter and the Ohr Hochma in Kli Hochma etc. then
the Ohr Hochma would not have been able to pour to the Guf. This is
so because it is then annulled in the Ohr Keter, as all the lower Sefirot
are annulled and become indistinguishable compared to the highest
Sefira in the degree.

--- PAGE 33 ---
For that reason, though each degree contains Eser Sefirot, it is named
only after the highest among them. Hence, it is impossible for the
Zivug to be made only on Behina Gimel for then the degrees come
down and the Ohr Hochma comes to Kli de Keter. In that state the
Ohr Hochma will be the highest Sefira and its He’arah will be
distinguishable.
ZON are outside their Kli. It follows, that reason Hochma cannot
bestow.
This means that as long as they are the Rosh, they are there without a
Kli. Hence, as long as the degrees are in their place and the Ohr Keter
Elyon is in its own Kli, its He’arah always reaches the ZON and they
cannot receive from another Ohr that is smaller than that. Thus, the
descent of the degrees is required, that Ohr Keter will not shine in its
Kli, but Ohr Hochma.
Thus, when Hochma departs and descends below to the place of
Bina, her place will remain vacant.
Interpretation: When the degree of Hochma descends to the degree of
Bina, the degree of Hochma is found to be vacant and there is no other
place for Ohr Hochma to clothe if not Kli de Keter, as its own Kli
serves the Ohr Bina.
While the Shefa pours from the Shoresh of Keter fills that vacant
Halal, Hochma pours below.
It follows, that while an Ohr that extends from the Kli fulfills it from
the missing degree of Hochma, meaning that Ohr Hochma itself
clothes there, the degree of Hochma gives below and is not annulled
in the Ohr Keter. This is because now it is the highest Sefira in the
Rosh and no degree is higher.
13. However, the descent of Hochma below will not diminish her
He’arah when the Maatzil grows one degree farther. This is
because the Ohr Keter Elyon fulfills that place of Halal.
Otherwise, had a vacant Halal been left there, the Ohr would
cease from the Maatzil to Hochma and she would even lose the

--- PAGE 34 ---
Hochma. It would have been better to leave her in her place. Now,
however, when Ohr Keter fulfills the place of that Halal, there is a
passageway to the Ohr of the Maatzil to pour in the Shoresh
Hochma, and she is not lost at all.
Ohr Pnimi
13. Will not diminish her He’arah when the Maatzil grows one degree
farther.
Thus, after the Kli de Hochma descends to the degree of Bina because
Ohr Bina clothed it, it did not create any cessation between the Sefirot
because of the missing degree of Hochma there. This is so for the
above reason that no vacant Halal remained there inside the degrees,
as Kli de Keter where Ohr Hochma clothed fills the place of that want.
It is written, “Now, however, when Ohr Keter fulfills the place of
that Halal, there is a passageway to the Ohr of the Maatzil to pour
in the Shoresh Hochma.” This means that the Ohr Hochma poured
from the Maatzil is poured in Kli de Keter and the Keter fills the place
of Hochma.
14. After ZON have received from the Shoresh of Hochma too, they do
not need to suck any longer. Then ZON descend in their Kli, the
Shoresh Hochma rises to her place, and the Shoresh Keter gathers
a part of the Ohr to it.
That Keter at the end of the Shorashim receives only the vitality it
needs. Now He is called Behinat Matei in the Keter to the Kli since
the Ohr returned to its Kli.
However, the Shoresh Keter Elyon is called Lo Matei below in
Akudim. Thus, we have deduced that the Ohr in the first Kli is
called Keter, containing only Ohr Hochma since the Ohr Keter
remained above at the end of the Shorashim. This is the meaning
of, “In wisdom hast Thou made them all.”
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 35 ---
14. After ZON have received from the Shoresh of Hochma too, they do
not need to suck any longer.
The Zivug was made on the complete Aviut de Behina Gimel, both
from the perspective of the Hamshacha and the perspective of the
Hitlabshut. Afterwards the Nukva of the Keter can expand from above
downward in Eser Sefirot to the Guf with the Ohr that she receives
from the Rosh. The Zachar de Kli de Keter expands along with her
and descends to the Guf. This is why it is written that then ZON
descend in their Kli, meaning the Guf.
Then ZON descend in their Kli, the Shoresh Hochma rises to her
place, and the Shoresh Keter gathers a part of the Ohr to it.
The matter of the decline of the above degrees that was made in the
Rosh, was only for the time of the Zivug. However, after the Zivug and
after ZON came down into their Kli, the degrees returned to their place
as in the beginning, the Ohr Keter Elyon returned to Kli de Keter, Ohr
Hochma to Kli de Hochma etc.
Yet, the Keter Elyon did not shine to the Ohr Keter below Malchut
until it could expand to the Guf as in the beginning, but, “the Shoresh
Keter gathers a part of the Ohr to it. That Keter at the end of the
Shorashim receives only the vitality it needs,” and not in a way that
it can expand to the Guf as in the beginning, for the above reason.
Matei in the Keter to the Kli.
This is because that Ohr of the Zivug that is made in Behinat Nekeva
de Keter de Behina Gimel of the Rosh, which is in Komat Hochma,
clothing Kli de Keter. It comes down with the above Zachar and
Nukva into the Guf and clothes Kli de Keter de Guf too.
It is written, “since the Ohr returned to its Kli.” This refers to Kli de
Keter that belongs to Ohr Hochma, since it extends so from the
Behinat Zivug, hence its name, Matei in Keter de Guf.
The Shoresh Keter Elyon is called Lo Matei below in Akudim.
It means that when it is written Matei in Keter de Guf it does not mean
that Ohr Keter of the Rosh shines in the Guf, as this Ohr Keter is

--- PAGE 36 ---
always Lo Matei in the Guf. Rather, it means Ohr Hochma of the
Rosh, but clothing in Kli de Keter.
Thus, we have deduced etc. containing only Ohr Hochma.
He lets us know that in this entire Hitpashtut Bet, when it writes Ohr
Keter it means only Ohr Hochma, as we have learned here that there is
no Ohr Keter in the Guf at all, but only Ohr Hochma. However,
because it clothes in the Kli de Keter, we called it Ohr Keter.
15. *Now we will explain this reality of the Histalkut Ohr Elyon. When
evaluating this reality of the Kli that contains all the Ohr, it is
necessary that when the Ohr leaves it, there will be parts in it that
are suitable for looking to that Ohr.
When it draws far from them, the Panim to Panim looking draws
as far from them as it has drawn far. The lesson in that is that
when the Ohr departs from the tenth part of that Kli, which will
be later called Malchut, that tenth part of that Kli, from which
that Ohr departed, thus becomes a Kli.
At that time the Kli turns its Panim down because it has now been
discerned as a Kli. When separated from its Ohr; it is unable to
look at it Panim be Panim. In that state it turns its Panim after it
has become a Kli and then it looks at the Ohr Elyon that has
drawn far from it only through the Achor.
Ohr Pnimi
15. Parts in it that are suitable for looking to that Ohr.
The place of bestowal or the place of reception in the Kli, is called
Panim. The bestowal or the reception themselves are called Histaklut
or Habata (gazing).
It is written, “When evaluating this reality of the Kli that contains
all the Ohr, it is necessary that when the Ohr leaves it, there will
be parts in it that are suitable for looking to that Ohr.” This is so
because each Histalkut is done by Hizdakchut of the Aviut in the
corrected Masach in the Kli.

--- PAGE 37 ---
It is known that there are four Behinot in the Masach. For example, if
Behina Dalet of the Kli is purified and the Ohr departs from the Kli
because of that, three Behinot of Aviut still remain in the Kli from
which the Ohr has not departed and they are still suitable for Habata
on the Ohr.
The Panim to Panim looking draws as far from them as it has
drawn far.
If the Aviut has been purified from Behina Dalet, the Ohr is distanced
from the Kli in the measure of Behina Dalet, not from the three other
Behinot. If it is also distanced from Behina Gimel, the Ohr will be
distanced from the Kli in the measure of Aviut of Behina Gimel too,
and not from the rest of the Kli which is from Behina Bet upward.
At that time the Kli turns its Panim down.
Here we must remember everything the Rav wrote regarding
Hitpashtut Aleph de Akudim in Part 4 regarding the descending Ohr
Hozer from the Komot that emerge during the Hizdakchut that shines
to the empty Kelim located under the place of the Zivug. Also, the
issue of Hakaa that these He’arot made with the Reshimot that remain
in those Kelim (see Part 4, Chap 9 and Ohr Pnimi items 50, 90).
From there you will understand that after the Aviut has been purified
from Behina Gimel to Behina Bet (for example), the Zivug is made in
Behina Bet and Behina Gimel remains empty without its Ohr. At that
time the Ohr Hozer descends from the He’arat Zivug de Behina Bet
into the Kli of the empty Behina Gimel.
Then there is Hakaa and Bitush between the descending Ohr Hozer
and the Reshimo in the empty Kli since the Reshimo is from the
Histalkut of the Zivug. For that reason the Reshimo must exit there and
ascend above the Kli as Tagin, making room for the Ohr Hozer to
come down into its Kli. Know, that this Ohr Hozer that descended into
the empty Kli operates in the Kli that will turn its Panim downward
and its Achor upward, as the Rav says here.

--- PAGE 38 ---
You already know that from the Behina of Hamshacha of Ohr in the
Kli, the wall of the Kli is divided into two halves called Panim and
Achor or Pnimiut and Hitzoniut (see Part 4, Chap 5 item 3).
Accordingly, you find that that empty Kli of the above Behina Gimel
is divided into Panim and Achor.
Its more Av half of the wall is called Panim since it extends the Ohr
Elyon to it through a Zivug, and the half of the wall that is not so Av is
called Achor. This is because it is silent in the Kli, and the Ohr has no
contact with it.
All this refers only to a time when the Ohr is present in the degree.
However, during the Histalkut of the Ohr from the degree de Behina
Gimel to Behina Bet, made in the Zivug de Behina Bet when the
He’arah of this Zivug descends to the empty Kli of the empty Behina
Gimel, the two halves of the wall are turned. The half of Panim
becomes Achor, and the half of Achor becomes Panim.
This is because the descending Ohr Hozer from Behina Bet into the
empty Kli becomes distant from the Aviut de Behina Gimel there since
it is Ohr from Behina Bet. It draws nearer to the half of the wall of the
Kli that is closest to Behina Bet and shines there.
Thus, the most Av of that Kli does not receive any He’arah from that
Ohr Hozer and now becomes Behinat Achor of the Kli. The most Zach
of that Kli now becomes the Panim of the Kli since the Ohr shines
only in its Zach part.
This is the meaning of, “At that time the Kli turns its Panim down,”
since it cannot receive anything from the He’arat Zivug made in the
Upper Behina. The Panim becomes Achor and turns its Achoraim
upward since it is now all that receives from the He’arat Ohr Hozer
that descended to it, and the Achor becomes Panim. This is called
inversion.
It has now been discerned as a Kli.
However, afterwards, when the Behina above it also becomes a
Behinat Kli, meaning the Zivug departs from there too, the He’arat

--- PAGE 39 ---
Ohr Hozer stops coming down to it. Then the Kli returns its Panim
upward as in the beginning since its Achor has now lost all its merit,
as the Reshimo now begins to shine to the Kli and the He’arat
Reshimo only the Behinat Panim of the Kli. It is like the Ohr prior to
its departure, not reaching its Behinat Achor. You find that the Kli has
been restored as in the beginning.
It looks at the Ohr Elyon etc. through the Achor.
This means that then you find that the He’arat Zivug that descends to
it from the highest Behina is received only through the Achor of the
Kli, which is the more Zach part of it. This is considered that the Kli
turned its Achoraim upward.
16. Now the Ohr Elyon too will be called Achor during its Histalkut
and that Kli will be Achor be Achor with that Ohr. After that Ohr
also leaves, one more portion, which will later be called Behinat
Yesod, departed from all of it. Then, that part will also turn its
Panim from the Ohr Elyon for it will not be able to receive it.
In that state, the first Behinat Kli, called Malchut, will be able to
turns its Panim upward since the Ohr drew far from it. At that
time Malchut and Yesod will be Panim be Panim but Yesod will be
Achor be Achor with the Ohr Elyon.
Ohr Pnimi
16. Now the Ohr Elyon too will be called Achor.
The matter of the appellations Panim and Achor applies only to the
Kelim. This is because in the Ohr they are called Hitpashtut and
Histalkut. The Rav calling the Histalkut Ohr here by the name Achor
is only in allegory, since he wants to compare the matter of the
Histalkut Ohr with the matter of the Achor in the Kelim and call them
Achor be Achor. The Rav has already explained the reason that the
empty Kelim are called Achor and Histalkut in Part 4, Chap 3 item 4.
Will be able to turns its Panim upward since the Ohr drew far
from it.

--- PAGE 40 ---
This is so because after the Zivug stops at the highest Behina too and
the He’arat Zivug stops descending to the Kli, the Reshimo shines in
the Kli once more. Then the Kli returns its Panim upward as in the
beginning since it does not receive any He’arah now.
17. Also, when Behinat Ohr of Hod departs, Hod will be Achor be
Achor with the Ohr Elyon. Then Yesod will turn its Panim to Hod,
Hod and Yesod will be Panim be Panim and Malchut will be Panim
be Achor, the Panim of Malchut in the Achoraim of Yesod.
This is so because the desire and the yearning of the Sefira to
return its Panim to the Ohr. However, the near Sefira to the Ohr
cannot return its Panim to it yet, before it draws the measure of
one Sefira far from the Ohr.
Ohr Pnimi
17. Before it draws the measure of one Sefira far from the Ohr.
As long as there is Zivug in the highest Sefira, the He’arat Zivug
comes from there to the empty Sefira below it. At that time this
He’arah reaches only the Behinat Achor in the Kli and not at all the
Panim. Thus, the Panim of the Kli are turned downward.
However, after the Ohr departs from the highest Sefira as well, the
He’arat Zivug reaches only from the Elyon to the Tachton, meaning
from the cause to the consequence but not from above its cause. This
is so even though there is still Zivug in the Sefira above the Upper
One.
Thus, the He’arat Reshimo returns and returns its Panim upward. This
is his precision, “Before it draws the measure of one Sefira far
from the Ohr,” and examine carefully.
18. Also, when the Ohr leaves the Behinat Netzah, Netzah will be
Achor be Achor with the Ohr Elyon and Panim be Panim with the
Hod. Yesod will be Panim be Achor with the Hod and Malchut too
Panim be Achor with the Yesod etc. similarly until the Ohr departs
from all ten parts of the Kli.

--- PAGE 41 ---
In that state all the Sefirot will be Panim be Achor, the Panim of
the inferior in the Achor of the superior. However, the Keter will
be Panim be Panim with the Hochma since the Keter is Achor be
Achor with the Ohr Elyon for the above reason. Therefore, Keter
and Hochma must be Panim be Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
18. The Keter is Achor be Achor with the Ohr Elyon.
This is because Behina Dalet did not leave a Reshimo. It is known that
Behina Dalet extends the Ohr Keter. Although Ohr Keter itself left a
Reshimo in its Kli, it is still only Behinat Reshimo de Hamshacha (see
Ohr Pnimi item 6). This is considered the Behinat Achor with regard
to the Behinat Hamshacha. For that reason it is also considered its
Achoraim being turned upward, and Panim downward.
Keter and Hochma must be Panim be Panim.
Hochma has a complete Reshimo from the Behinat Hamshacha. This
Reshimo brings its Panim upward once again. Keter lacks the Reshimo
de Hamshacha, hence its Achoraim are turned upward. Hence, they
are found to be equalized with one another, which is called Panim be
Panim. This will be clarified below.
19. Thus we have explained the Histalkut and how the Kelim were
made by that. Yet, we have explained how there are Kli Malchut
and Yesod etc. in this Kli. Yet, this is not why it is called Kelim,
since it is still not apparent that they are ten Sefirot, and also that
the Ohr departed together.
The thing is that it is like one long Kli whose parts are not equal
according to the distancing of those parts from one end to the
other. Thus we have explained the existence of the Ohr, its
Hitpashtut and its Histalkut, and they are two Behinot.
20. Now there is another Hitpashtut and Histalkut, as will be
explained, and then the four Behinot will be completed. The thing
is that when this Behinat Kli was completed and became a Kli by

--- PAGE 42 ---
the Histalkut of the Ohr, when the Ohr expands in this Kli once
more, there will remain a discernment of Orot and Kelim.
However, when the Ohr expands in this Kli for the second time, it
does not expand in the first order, but appears and disappears.
This is the meaning of what is written in the Zohar, “Matei ve Lo
Matei.” These two Behinot are called Hitpashtut and Histalkut, by
which the four Behinot will be completed.
Ohr Pnimi
20. “Matei ve Lo Matei.” These two Behinot are called Hitpashtut and
Histalkut, by which the four Behinot.
This refers to the four Otiot of the Name HaVaYaH. This is because
these two Behinot of Hitpashtut and Histalkut de Hitpashtut Aleph de
Akudim that he introduced above (item 19) are the two Otiot Yod, Hey
of HaVaYaH. These two Behinot of Hitpashtut and Histalkut in
Hitpashtut Bet de Akudim, called Matei ve Lo Matei, are the two Otiot
Vav, Hey of HaVaYaH.
The beginning of the Matei of Ohr inside the Kli de Keter.
Will be explained below.
21. The thing is that first the Ohr enters the Kli of Keter and then
leaves it. After that the Ohr enters Kli of Hochma and leaves once
more. It does the same in all ten Kelim, and this is called Matei ve
Lo Matei that is always mentioned in the Zohar.
It is always in the nature of that Ohr to come and shine and then
leave, as it is the nature of a candle’s flame to sway. Also, the Ohr
always remains Matei ve Lo Matei in these Kelim called Akudim.
Because they are in one Kli, that Kli has no power to tolerate the
Ohr if it is not Matei ve Lo Matei.
Thus we have explained the four Behinot that are the first
Hitpashtut and its Histalkut, and the second Hitpashtut and its
Histalkut. We have also explained that the second Hitpashtut and
Histalkut are called Matei ve Lo Matei. For that reason this Kli is

--- PAGE 43 ---
called Akudim, since it is one Kli that connects and ties ten Orot
within it.
Ohr Pnimi
21. Because they are in one Kli, that Kli has no power to tolerate the
Ohr.
Until Olam ha Nekudim there is no more than one Kli in the entire
Eser Sefirot. Even though we refer to the other Sefirot as Kelim, it is
only in metaphor, to simplify matters, as the Rav has written above
(Part 4, Chap 1).
This is the reason for the Hizdakchut and the Histalkut Orot de
Hitpashtut Aleph de Akudim as well as the Matei ve Lo Matei de
Hitpashtut Bet de Akudim, as the Rav wrote above (Part 4, Chap 1
item 3). Since the ten inner Orot and the ten surrounding Orot are
connected and tied to a single Kli etc. they beat on each other and
strike one another.
Hence the Aviut in the Masach is purified and the Orot depart. It is the
same manner in all these ten exits and ten entrances that were here in
Hitpashtut Bet. They are also for the reason that that the Ohr Makif
and Ohr Pnimi that are connected together in their Shoresh in Malchut
of the Rosh strike each other as they depart from there to the Guf.
This is because the Masach prevents the Ohr Makif from expanding to
its place in the Guf, meaning from Tabur down. For that reason it
purifies the Masach and the Masach cannot tolerate and limit the Ohr
Pnimi inside the Kelim and the Orot leave and return as we have
written before (see Part 4, Chap 1, item7 Ohr Pnimi).
22. This also explains how come the Kli is considered one Kli, alone,
and the Orot are considered ten. This is because when the Ohr
leaves, everything is considered one Kli and not ten Kelim.
However, regarding the Orot in them, when they return to expand
in a real Hitpashtut, which is the second Hitpashtut, it does not
expand in one time inside the Kli as it departed. Rather, it enters
and exits ten exits and ten entrances.

--- PAGE 44 ---
It enters and exits ten times, once in Keter, once in Hochma and so
forth in all of them, hence they are called ten Orot. The Kli,
however, is made at once by Histalkut Aleph when it left at one
time. For that reason it is called one Kli.
Ohr Pnimi
22. Hence they are called ten Orot. The Kli, however, is made at once.
Compared to the Kli, all these departures are considered one Histalkut.
This is because here there is still only one Kli, only Kli Malchut.
There is no recognition of a Kli in the first nine Sefirot and all these
exits and entrances made in it are considered as one long Kli whose
parts are not equal as the Rav says above (item 19). Know, that all
these are preparations for the Tikun of the Eser Kelim in the Eser
Sefirot.
Things are done gradually: in Hitpashtut de AK there is still no
recognition through the Histalkut. Even the discernment in the Orot
does not show that they are ten Orot. In Hitpashtut Bet there is a
discernment in the Eser Sefirot that they are ten Orot, and in the
Hitpashtut of the Eser Sefirot in Olam Nekudim there is a recognition
of the Eser Kelim in the GAR and not in the seven lower Sefirot. It is
completed in Olam Atzilut and ten complete Kelim are made in all ten
Sefirot.
23. These four Behinot are the actual four Otiot HaVaYaH. The Yod-
Vav are two Behinot Hitpashtut, and the Heys (pl. for Hey) are two
Behinot Histalkut.
You already know that the name HaVaYaH begins only from
Hochma downward. The reason is that these four Behinot belong
only to Hochma and under, but Keter contains only two Behinot.
For this reason it is called Yod-Hey, Yod-Hey-Vav-Hey.
This is the meaning of, “for the Lord is God, an everlasting
Rock.” This is because He first began to picture and create the
world in them. This is the meaning of Akudim, which are the Yod-

--- PAGE 45 ---
Hey HaVaYaH. This because Yod-Hey in Keter, HaVaYaH in all the
other Partzufim.
Ohr Pnimi
23. The Yod-Vav are two Behinot Hitpashtut, and the Heys are two
Behinot Histalkut.
The first Hitpashtut is the Yod; the second Hitpashtut is the Vav. The
first Histalkut is the First Hey and the second Histalkut is the last Hey.
HaVaYaH begins only from Hochma downward.
It is known that the Yod means Hochma, Vav means ZA, the First Hey
means Bina and the last Hey means Malchut. Keter, however, is not
implied in the four Otiot, except in the tip of the Yod. This is so for the
reason that the Rav explains below.
24. The reason is that below, the nine Sefirot have the four deficits of
the Ohr. This in itself will cause the giving of the Name of the Ohr
Elyon, making these four deficits capable of being called
HaVaYaH.
They are those: The first is the Hitpashtut of the Ohr for the first
time. At that time the Ohr begins to expand in Keter, the first
among them. At that time all nine below it lack that Ohr.
Thus, when the Ohr appeared in the reality of Keter, all the rest
were still absent. This is the first deficit in the first Hitpashtut of
the nine Kelim. This deficit is absent in Keter.
Ohr Pnimi
24. The four deficits of the Ohr. This in itself will cause the giving of
the Name of the Ohr Elyon, making these four deficits capable of
being called HaVaYaH.
Interpretation: the meaning of the Otiot is Kelim that were emanated
and made by the Nitzotzin that fell from the Ohr Hozer of the four
Komot that came out during the Histalkut of the Ohr of Hitpashtut
Aleph. They came into the empty Kelim after the Histalkut of the Ohr
from them.

--- PAGE 46 ---
As has been explained in the Rav’s words above (Part 4, chap3 item
12 (see Ohr Pnimi there item 100), any “Name” implies attainment,
since “anything that we do not attain, we do not call by a name.” It is
known that there is no attainment in the Ohr without a Kli, and it has
also been explained (Part 4, Chap 1 item 9) that the Hitpashtut of the
Ohr and its Histalkut are the reason for the making of the Kli.
Thus, the lack of Ohr makes for the extistence of the Kelim and the
Holy Names. It is written, “the nine Sefirot have the four deficits of
the Ohr. This in itself will cause the giving of the Name of the Ohr
Elyon, making these four deficits capable of being called
HaVaYaH.” In other words, it is so that there will be a possibility to
attain Him in that Name.
The Hitpashtut of the Ohr for the first time etc. This is the first
deficit in the first Hitpashtut of the nine Kelim.
This means that when the Ohr begins to expand in the Keter the Ohr is
in Behinat Ohr Yashar, Rachamim. At that time all nine below it lack
that complete Ohr.
Although they are considered Ohr Hozer and Din and are therefore
called Nekudot, hence there is a blemish here in the lower nine of
Hitpashtut Aleph. However, here there is no blemish in the Keter
whatsoever, hence the Keter is not implied in the Otiot of the Name
HaVaYaH, as they imply the lack of the Ohr.
Rather, the Hitpashtut of the nine Sefirot below Keter, being the four
Komot HB ZON that came out as Ohr Hozer and Din, imply the Yod of
HaVaYaH. also, the Histalkut of the entire Hitpashtut Aleph in general
is the meaning of the Hey de HaVaYaH. They are called the Yod-Hey
de Keter, as the whole of Hitpashtut Aleph is called Keter.
25. In the second Hitpashtut, this deficit will also be in the nine Sefirot
once more, not in the Keter. Hence, there are two deficits in the
nine Sefirot and not in Keter. This is so because when no Ohr is
emanated, it is not called a deficit.

--- PAGE 47 ---
However, once this Ohr begins to expand, it first expands in Keter.
At that time the nine Sefirot will be considered lacking that Ohr,
as the Ohr Keter preceded them. However, the other two deficits
are found in both Keter and the nine Sefirot, and it is the two
Behinot Histalkut, since this is called a true deficit whether to the
nine Sefirot or to the Keter Himself.
Ohr Pnimi
25. In the second Hitpashtut, this deficit will also be in the nine Sefirot
once more, not in the Keter.
This is so because in Hitpashtut Bet too only Keter came out in
Behinat Taamim. However, the other nine Sefirot came out during the
Hizdakchut as Nekudot and that lack appeared in them a second time.
Hence, the Keter de Hitpashtut Bet is not implied in the four Otiot
HaVaYaH, even in Hitpashtut Bet, as that lack is not in it but only
from Hochma down. These are the four Komot HB ZON that emerge
because of the Hizdakchut of the Masach (as he writes below) called
Nekudot. They are implied in the Vav of HaVaYaH and the general
Histalkut of this Hitpashtut Bet is the last Hey of HaVaYaH.
The Rav says above (item 23) about this Hitpashtut Bet, HaVaYaH in
the all the other Partzufim. This is because the two lacks of Hitpashtut
Aleph are present in this Hitpashtut Bet too, as we shall see below.
The nine Sefirot will be considered lacking that Ohr, as the Ohr
Keter preceded them.
It means that the matter of the lack in them is only compared to the
Ohr Keter that preceded them in its merit. Compared to Him, they are
considered Ohr Hozer and Din though in themselves they are
Rachamim since they too extend from the Maatzil from above
downward, as the Rav wrote above (Part 4, Chap 2 item 1).
It is known that all that extends from above downward is Rachamim.
Yet, compared to the Ohr Keter they are considered Din since they
only exit by the power of the Histalkut of His Ohr (see Part 4, Chap 6
and Ohr Pnimi item 9). However, the two Behinot of the general

--- PAGE 48 ---
Histalkut of Hitpashtut Aleph and Hitpashtut Bet implied in the two
Otiot Hey of the Name HaVaYaH are a true lack and Behinat Din in
themselves too, as the Rav says above.
We understand from all the above that the Yod in the HaVaYaH is the
Ohr of Nekudot of Hitpashtut Aleph, meaning the nine Sefirot from
Hochma downward that came out there during the Histalkut Ohr
Taamim.
The First Hey in the Name HaVaYaH is the general Histalkut of this
Hitpashtut Aleph, the Vav in the Name HaVaYaH implies the Ohr
Nekudot of Hitpashtut Bet. The last Hey in the Name HaVaYaH
implies the general Histalkut of this Hitpashtut Bet. Thus, the two
expansions of Ohr Nekudot imply the Yod-Vav in the Name HaVaYaH
and the two departures imply the Hey-Hey in the Name HaVaYaH.
He writes (item 23), “Yod-Hey in Keter, HaVaYaH in all the other
Partzufim.” It means that that the Hitpashtut of the nine Sefirot from
Hochma downward that came out during the Histalkut Ohr Keter de
Hitpashtut Aleph and the Histalkut Ohr de Hitpashtut Aleph in
general, is the meaning of the “Yod-Hey in Keter.”
This is so because as a whole, Hitpashtut Aleph is called Keter, as it is
known that it is Partzuf Keter de AK. These two lacks of the Ohr,
meaning the Histalkut compared to Keter, and not compared to
themselves.
The Behina of its real Histalkut, in themselves too, is necessarily
received inside Hitpashtut Bet. This is because all the forces that
appear in the Elyon must necessarily be in its Tachton.
Hence, these Yod-Hey de Hitpashtut Aleph are in Hitpashtut Bet too.
Added to them are these two lacks of the Ohr in their own Behina,
which are Behinat Histalkut compared to the Keter of Hitpashtut Bet,
and compared to the value of the lower nine themselves. It is also the
real collective Behinat Histalkut of Hitpashtut Bet, implied in the Vav-
Hey.

--- PAGE 49 ---
Thus, we have all four Otiot of the Name HaVaYaH here in Hitpashtut
Bet. It is written, “HaVaYaH in all the other Partzufim,” meaning the
Partzufim of Hitpashtut Bet.
26. We shall explain this matter that writes that these Behinot are
called, “for the Lord is God, an everlasting Rock.” This is the
meaning of the verse, “extol Him that rideth upon the skies, whose
name is the Lord ( יב"ה ).”
We must be meticulous with this verse. He should have said, “ י"ה
” (Lord) is His name, but what is “ יב"ה ”? The thing is that the
entire name is contained in the “ יב"ה ” and this is the meaning of,
“whose name is the Lord ( יב»ה ).”
The “ י"ה ” in its fullest is Yod (comprised of the letters Yod, Vav,
Dalet), He (comprised of the letters Hey, Aleph), twenty-six in
Gimatria, which is HaVaYaH. Thus, “ יב"ה ” is the actual name
and the name “ י"ה ” in Keter. It implies how the name HaVaYaH
emerged from it containing all the four Otiot HaVaYaH.
Ohr Pnimi
26. Thus, “ יב"ה ” is the actual name etc. It implies how the name
HaVaYaH emerged from it containing all the four Otiot HaVaYaH.
This is the meaning of the verse, “extol Him that rideth upon the skies
(Heb: Aravot)”: Aravot implies Eruv (lit. mixture) of Midat ha
Rachamim with Din. It begins in the Partzufim of Hitpashtut Bet and
says, “whose name is the Lord ( יב»ה ).”
( יב»ה ) implies Keter where there is still no mixture. Hence, the
HaVaYaH of Hitpashtut Bet extends from it and in all the other
Partzufim until Olam ha Atzilut, where the mixture ends, and ten
Kelim emerge.
This is the entire reason for giving a good reward to the righteous, as
it is written above (Part 4, Chap 1 item 4 in Ohr Pnimi). This is the
meaning of the verse, “extol Him that rideth upon the skies,” who
mixed and associated Midat ha Rachamim with Din. It came out of the
meaning of “ י"ה ” His Name in Keter.

--- PAGE 50 ---
This is the meaning of Hitpashtut and Histalkut and in that “exult ye
before Him,” for in that was all the good reward prepared and
concealed for the righteous.
27. *Know, that all these Kelim did not gain Aviut and become Kelim
only after the Histalkut of Ohr Malchut. At that time He turned
His Panim from the Kli. It is so because the Ohr Elyon of the Kli of
Keter departed and rose to the Maatzil. Despite that, because Ohr
Hochma rose in its place the Kli of Keter does not gain Aviut and
materialize. It is the same way in all the other Orot.
You find that it’s been explained in the previous study that Ohr
Keter of Akudim leaves first of all and Ohr Malchut leaves last of
all. It follows, that the existence of Behinat Kli begins only from
below upward.
Also, the Kli of Malchut is made before all the others. This is
because since Ohr Malchut leaves last, when it leaves its own Kli
the Kli does not become more Av until its Histalkut from its entire
Kli is completed.
At that time the nine Upper Kelim still have Ohr though none of
them as any a part of the Ohr that reaches its actual part. For that
reason they do not become Av and materialize.
Kli Malchut, however, has been entirely emptied of her Ohr. Also,
there is no other Ohr below her to rise inside her. Hence, she gains
Aviut and becomes a Kli.
Despite that, she does not become completely Av until the Ohr
departs from her entirely, three degrees etc. The reason for it will
be understood with the above mentioned, that any less than three
is considered alone. Thus, after the Ohr departed by three
complete degrees the Kli becomes completely dark and its making
is complete.
Ohr Pnimi
27. Until the Ohr departs from her entirely, three degrees etc.

--- PAGE 51 ---
The Kli is made only by the complete Histalkut of the Ohr from it,
both Ohr Pnimi and Ohr Makif. It is known that up to two degrees, the
Kli still receives Ohr Makif. For that reason it does not become a Kli
until the Ohr draws far from it by three degrees.
Take Kli de ZA for example. When Ohr ZA leaves the Kli and rises to
Bina, it is no longer considered as distancing of the degree since it still
receives Yechida de Ohr Pnimi. Only when it departs and rises to
Hochma does it depart one degree from the Kli and receives the first
Ohr Makif.
Afterwards, when it departs two degrees and ascends to Keter, it still
receives the second Ohr Pnimi. Thus, the Kli is not yet entirely dark,
until it leaves from the Keter to the Maatzil as well. At that time the
Kli does not attain any Ohr, and it is completed.
The same applies to Kli Malchut. When the Ohr departs one degree
from her, meaning when Ohr Malchut ascends to ZA, she still receives
the first Ohr Makif. When it departs two degrees, meaning when it
ascends to Bina, it still receives the second Ohr Makif. Only when Ohr
Malchut ascends to Hochma, which is the third degree, no He’arah is
received, the Kli Malchut becomes completely dark, and it is
completed.
Hence, the Kelim were not completed from Bina upward. This is
because even when Ohr Bina ascends to Keter, Bina still receives
Yechida de Ohr Pnimi. This is not considered a distancing in the
degree at all, much less with Keter and Hochma. Study all that in the
Rav’s words above (Part 4, Chap 6 item 15).
Besides the above, there is yet another condition for the completion of
the Kli, namely the completeness of the outer half of the wall of the
Kli, mentioned in the Rav’s words above (Part 4, Chap 4 item 3). As
long as there is not the outer half of the wall of the Kli that belongs to
the Makifim, the Kli is not completed.
Thus, the Kelim de GAR did not attain any Orot Makifim during their
ascent to the Maatzil, as the Rav says there. Consequently, the Kelim
de GAR are found to be lacking the outer half of the wall of their outer

--- PAGE 52 ---
Kli. For that reason they were only completed later, in Hitpashtut Bet,
as the Rav says here.
28. You find that after the Histalkut of Ohr Malchut it rose to its
Shoresh inside Peh de AK. At that time the work of the seven lower
Kelim from Hesed to Malchut ends. Thus, the end of their work
was through the Histalkut Orot, and when they departed, their
Kelim were made.
However, the work of the three Upper Kelim of Keter Hochma
Bina was not over since they have not yet distanced three complete
degrees from the Ohr Malchut that rose to the Maatzil. Yet, the end
of their work was afterwards when the Orot returned to come
down a second descent into the above Kelim.
Ohr Pnimi
28. Yet, the end of their work was afterwards when the Orot returned
to come down a second descent.
It is so because then the Hitzoniut of their Kelim is completed and the
Orot are also permanently diminished there. This is because only Ohr
Hochma comes to Kli de Keter and Ohr Bina to Kli de Hochma etc.
That completes their Behinat Kelim.
29. We shall add another explanation about making those Kelim. It
has been explained in the previous study that the three kinds of
Orot that came out of AHP de AK are considered NRN and clothe
each other.
However, the Ohr that comes out of the Eynaim de AK is called
Neshama to Neshama, which is called Haya. Its place is up there in
the Ayin but it expands below, as we shall explain.
This is so because it stands in its place as Ohr Makif to them.
From them downward expands a very minute Ohr called Reiah. It
is not a complete Hevel like the Havalim that extend from the
AHP. Those are complete tangible and sensed Havalim. In
addition, since it is a very frail and thin Ohr, the Behinat Kelim of

--- PAGE 53 ---
Akudim that exit from the Peh were made of it and the Orot are
not made since it is a frail Ohr.
However, the Ohr AHP was not an actual tangible and sensed
Hevel. Even the Behinat Kelim couldn’t have been made since they
are lower Orot than the Ohr Eynaim. For that reason they come
out actual, sensed Hevel and thus the Behinot Orot that are called
NRN were made.
Ohr Pnimi
29. Orot that came out of AHP de AK are considered NRN.
This has already been explained in the Rav’s words above (Part 4,
Chap 6 item 6) and in Ohr Pnimi.
The Ohr that comes out of the Eynaim etc. Its place is up there in
the Ayin etc. as Ohr Makif.
This refers to Behinat Ohr Makif de Yechida to ZA. However, as the
Rav says (Part 4, Chap 6 item 17), it does not reach the Nukva even as
Behinat Ohr Makif.
A very minute Ohr called Reiah. It is not a complete Hevel like the
Havalim that extend from the AHP. Those are complete tangible
and sensed Havalim.
The Ohr Hozer that expands from above downward with the Ohr
Yashar inside it into Eser Sefirot called Guf is called Hevel. This is
because it comes out of the Zivug de Hakaa in the Aviut in the
Masach.
If there is a lot of Aviut the Ohr Hozer is greater and the Koma is
greater. Hence, until Behina Bet, the Aviut in the Masach is considered
sufficient to raise Ohr Hozer to extend the Ohr from below upward in
a sufficient measure to afterwards expand from above downward into
Behinat Guf as well. For that reason the Ohr Hozer is called
“Complete Hevel”.
However, the Aviut from Behina Aleph, called Eynaim, note that the
Aviut of that Behina is very thin and frail. It is a not a complete Hevel

--- PAGE 54 ---
that can also expand from above downward and for that reason no Ohr
comes from it into the Guf.
It is written, “since it is a very frail and thin Ohr, the Behinat Kelim
of Akudim etc. were made of it.” It means that we discern only the
Behinat Ohr Yashar in the Ohr Eynaim.
This is the Behinat Atzmut Ohr that makes a Zivug de Hakaa in the
Orot de AHP and generates the Kelim for them as he explains before
us. However, in itself, the Zivug is insufficient to generate Komat Ohr
to the Guf as the AHP, only as a frail Ohr.
30. Let us return to the matter of the Reiah of the Eynaim. It is said
that the making of the Kelim was through its Histaklut, Reiah and
Habata in the Ohr Akudim, called the above mentioned Nefesh.
This is the meaning of the verse, “And God saw the light, that it
was good; and God divided” etc. The Ruach and the Neshama,
which are the Orot Awzen and Hotem, are called complete Ohr.
The Nefesh, which is Akudim that exit from the Peh, are implied in
the excess word “the”, in what the text says “the light.”
He said that since God is the emanator, He sees and looks at the
Nefesh, called “the” and then divides. This is considered making
the Kelim that separate, limit and place a ration and measurement
in the Orot and their parts are separated from one another.
Ohr Pnimi
30. Its Histaklut, Reiah and Habata in the Ohr Akudim, called the
above mentioned Nefesh.
The Peh de Rosh is called Nefesh. The Hitpashtut Ohr is called
Histaklut and Habata. Hence, the Hitpashtut Ohr Elyon to the Masach
in Kli Malchut for Zivug de Hakaa is called Histaklut and Habata in
the Nefesh, meaning the Masach in Malchut.
The emanator, He sees and looks at the Nefesh, called “the”.
As has been written in the previous item, the Masach in Kli Malchut is
called Nefesh and is called “the”, as the Rav has written, and examine

--- PAGE 55 ---
carefully (Part 3, Chap 3 item 3).
31. There is Ohr Yashar and Ohr Hozer in this Reiah. In the Histaklut
of this Reiah as Ohr Yashar in the Ohr Nefesh there was sufficient
ability to make the Kelim of the First Three. Yet, the seven lower
Kelim were not finished until the Histaklut Ohr Yashar extended
down to the tenth Kli of Malchut.
Afterwards the two Orot returned, being the Ohr of the Reiah of
Ayin and the Ohr Nefesh that extended from the Peh. Both
returned to depart upward from below upward and the seven
lower Kelim were made during their Histalkut from below upward
as Ohr Hozer. Yet, the first three Kelim were made in the Ohr
Yashar from above downward through the Histaklut Ohr Yashar de
Eynaim in the Ohr Nefesh.
Ohr Pnimi
31. There is Ohr Yashar and Ohr Hozer in this Reiah.
This is because the Hitpashtut Ohr Elyon in the Partzuf is called Reiah
and that part of the Ohr that is received in the Partzuf is called Ohr
Yashar, meaning up to Kli Malchut. That part of the Ohr that is not
received in the Partzuf because of the Masach that pushes it back,
which was suitable for clothing in Malchut, is called Ohr Hozer. This
is why it is said that there is Ohr Yashar and Ohr Hozer in this Reiah.
In the Histaklut of this Reiah as Ohr Yashar in the Ohr Nefesh.
This refers to Malchut, called Nefesh. The Ohr Nefesh refers to the
Ohr Hozer that she raises up from her upward clothing the Ohr Elyon
as Eser Sefirot of the Rosh.
It is written, “there was sufficient ability to make the Kelim of the
First Three.” It means that the Kelim of the Eser Sefirot de Rosh,
which are from below upward, are considered the Shorashim of the
Kelim.
The seven lower Kelim were not finished until the Histaklut Ohr
Yashar extended down to the tenth Kli of Malchut.

--- PAGE 56 ---
She is called Malchut de Malchut, or Nefesh de Malchut. This is
because this above-mentioned Malchut of the Rosh, called Nefesh or
“the” expanded in itself into Eser Sefirot from her and within her
through her own Malchut, meaning Malchut de Malchut.
These Eser Sefirot are called Guf or the seven lower Sefirot. They are
called AK in Akudim, expanding form Peh de AK through its Tabur
because Malchut of the Rosh is called Peh and Malchut de Malchut is
called Tabur.
The Ohr of the Reiah of Ayin and the Ohr Nefesh that extended
from the Peh.
Meaning the Ohr Yashar and Ohr Hozer because the Ohr Reiah is Ohr
Yashar and the Ohr Nefesh is the Ohr Hozer that ascends from the
Malchut.
Both returned to depart upward from below upward etc. the
seven lower Kelim were made during their Histalkut from below
upward as Ohr Hozer.
Meaning through the Masach, as it is written at length above (Part 4).
In the Hizdakchut of the Masach from Behina Dalet to Behina Gimel
the Zivug from Behina Dalet stops. The Ohr Hozer with the Ohr
Yashar de Komat Keter within it leaves, rises up and the Zivug is made
in Behina Gimel, which is Behinat ZA de Ohr Yashar. Then the Ohr
Hozer of that Zivug connects and clothes only Komat Hochma.
Ohr Hochma comes in Kli de Keter, Ohr Bina in Kli de Hochma and
Ohr ZA in Kli de Bina, Ohr Malchut in Kli ZA and Kli Malchut
remains without Ohr. Then Kli Malchut darkens and thickens and
becomes a Kli, as the Rav has written (item 27).
Afterwards, when the Masach de Behina Gimel purified into Behina
Bet, which is Bina de Ohr Yashar, and the Ohr Hozer and Ohr Yashar
de Komat Hochma departed, Komat Bina was extended. At that time
the Ohr Bina clothes Kli de Keter, Ohr ZA in Kli de Hochma and Ohr
Malchut in Kli de Bina. Hence, Kli de ZA too remains without Ohr. In
that state Kli de ZA also darkens and thickens, thus becoming a Kli.

--- PAGE 57 ---
When it purifies from Behina Bet to Behina Aleph, which is Hochma
de Ohr Yashar, Komat Bina departs and Komat ZA extends. Then Ohr
ZA comes in Kli de Keter and the Kli Bina too remains without Ohr.
Thus Kli de Bina too darkens and thickens etc. similarly.
Thus, the Kelim de Guf are made only through the Histalkut Ohr
Yashar and the Ohr Hozer upward, as then they darken, thicken, and
become Kelim.
However, only the two Kelim of ZA and Malchut were entirely
completed through this Histalkut in both their inner half for Ohr Pnimi
and their outer half for Ohr Makif (Ohr Pnimi item 27).
However, the three Kelim Keter Hochma Bina were not yet completed
here in this Histalkut since they still lack the outer half of their walls.
This is so because they did not have any ascents to attain Kelim and
Orot Makifim, hence they were only completed afterwards, in
Hitpashtut Bet.
Yet, the first three Kelim were made in the Ohr Yashar from above
downward through the Histaklut Ohr Yashar de Eynaim in the Ohr
Nefesh.
It means that their Kelim de GAR, the Eser Sefirot de Rosh, were made
through the Hitpashtut Ohr Yashar from above downward into Zivug
de Hakaa in the Malchut. Malchut raised Ohr Hozer from below
upward and clothed the Ohr Yashar de Eynaim, as the Rav has written
at length in the beginning of Part 3.
32. Now we shall explain how that second return of Orot was. Know,
that their second return is not like their first descent. This is
because then all ten Orot came down to their place.
However, in this second descent, had they all descended back to
their place, the Kelim that have already been made by their
Histalkut would have nullified as in the beginning. They would not
have been able to tolerate their Orot, as it happened to them
before.

--- PAGE 58 ---
Therefore, it became necessary that the Ohr Elyon in all of them,
being Keter, which is great and equal to all the nine Orot put
together, would always remain above, attached to the Shoresh that
emanates it, which is the Toch of the Peh of AK.
33. Only the lower nine Orot came out of it again. They expanded in
the following manner: Ohr Hochma entered the Kli of Keter; Ohr
Bina entered the Kli of Hochma etc. until you find that Ohr
Malchut entered the Kli of Yesod.
Now there are two changes from the way it was at first. The
greatest of all Orot put together, namely Keter, remained above in
its Shoresh.
Moreover, even though the Kli of Keter does not have the power to
tolerate its own great Ohr, it can tolerate the Ohr Hochma, which
is much smaller than Keter. It is similar in all the other Sefirot,
and for the above two reasons there is now an ability in these
Kelim to tolerate their Ohr and they are not cancelled as in the
beginning.
34. We will explain below that all nine Orot Tachtonim enter the Kli of
Keter together. Afterwards only Ohr Hochma remains inside it
while the other eight Orot descend and enter the Kli of Bina and so
on similarly with all of them.
However, that does not add or subtract. We have a great rule in
our hands: the Elyon is greater than everything below it. Hence,
even when the nine Orot enter the Kli of Keter together, all the
eight Tachtonim are of no consequence compared to the Ohr
Hochma that is higher than them and emanated them.
It has already been explained that the Ohr Hochma can tolerate
the Kli of Keter since it is a higher Behina. Thus, of course it will
tolerate the rest of the eight Orot below it, and likewise in the rest
of the Kelim.
The Ohr that is designated to the Kli does not enter it, only a small
Ohr in its place. For that reason they can tolerate the Orot and are

--- PAGE 59 ---
not cancelled as in the beginning.
35. *We must thoroughly explain the meaning of Matei ve Lo Matei. It
is said that in the beginning the Ohr comes in Keter and nine Orot
are contained in Him.
Afterwards it returns to being Behinat Lo Matei, when the Ohr
that reaches the Keter exits there once more. However, the nine
other Orot remained in Keter since Keter has the power to tolerate
them.
In that state, when the Ohr is Lo Matei in the Keter, Keter extends
the nine Orot to Hochma Panim be Panim and places them in
Hochma. At that time Hochma turns her Panim, after receiving
the nine Orot, and shines to Bina Panim be Panim. It is only
He’arah, but she still does not give her the seven Orot.
Ohr Pnimi
35. In the beginning the Ohr comes in Keter and nine Orot are
contained in Him.
In order to understand the Rav’s words here we must thoroughly
remember and clearly understand all his words in the beginning of the
Part from item 1 to item 15 and what we explained there, as it is
because it is impossible to repeat all that length from there. Here we
shall briefly review the item headlines.
First examine the order of the ascents of the Sefirot to the Maatzil after
their Histalkut from the first Hitpashtut explained in Part 4, Chap 4
item 6. The gist of all the above is that the Zivug de Hakaa made in
the first Partzuf de AK was on the corrected Masach in Kli Malchut
that was in the Gadlut of the Aviut, meaning Aviut de Behina Dalet.
Hence, that Malchut raised the greatest Ohr Hozer, up to Komat Keter.
This Ohr Hozer rose and clothed the Ohr Elyon from below upward,
and these Eser Sefirot are called Eser Sefirot of Rosh.
It is the conduct of the Malchut and the Ohr Hozer that as it clothes
from below upward, to the same extent it inverts and expands the Kli
Malchut from above downward from her and within her up to that

--- PAGE 60 ---
Malchut de Malchut. There it descends and clothes the entire Komat
Ohr Yashar that is clothed in the Rosh.
This Hitlabshut is called Hitpashtut Aleph de AK. It is also called Eser
Sefirot de Guf, the Malchut of the Rosh is called Peh, and Malchut de
Malchut, which is Malchut de Guf, is called Tabur.
Since there is still no apparent limitation in Malchut of the Rosh, the
Ohr Makif and the Ohr Pnimi shine there equally. However, when the
Ohr expands from there into the Eser Sefirot de Guf through the
Tabur, being Malchut de Guf, the Masach de Tabur stopped the Ohr
Yashar and did not let it expand below Tabur. That means that that
Ohr Yashar ascribed to the first nine Sefirot called Ohr Pnimi clothed
the nine Sefirot de Guf through the Tabur. Also, that Ohr Yashar
ascribed to Malchut could not enter and clothe its place below Tabur
since of the Masach there and remained outside the Partzuf as Ohr
Makif.
Hence, there was a Hakaa and Bitush between the Ohr Makif and the
Ohr Pnimi on that Gevul, called Masach de Tabur. This is because the
Ohr Makif also wanted to come down and clothe in its place as did the
Ohr Pnimi since both of them illuminated equally in the Rosh. For that
reason the Ohr Makif overpowered and purified the Masach from its
Aviut so that its force of detainment would disappear from it and the
Ohr Makif would be able to clothe too.
Understand that thoroughly for this is the explanation of the whole
issue of the Hizdakchut of the Masach in each and every Partzuf.
There is no apparent limitation on the Ohr Makif in any Rosh. Hence,
it too wishes to clothe in the Guf.
Thus, it purifies the Aviut in the Masach, meaning the Behinat
detainment in it. This is because the measure of the Aviut in the
Masach is the measure of its detainment; they are one matter in it.
Indeed, the Ohr Makif purified the entire Aviut present in the Masach
all at once and brought it to the Maatzil, meaning to Peh de Rosh,
where it is not limited at all. It means that the Masach purified from
the entire Aviut de Guf and all that remained in it is the Behinat

--- PAGE 61 ---
Shoresh in it, which is the Behinat Masach de Malchut of the Rosh.
This is called the ascent to the Peh, as Hishtavut Tzura makes the
spirituals into one.
However, since there are four degrees in the Aviut, it is necessary that
that the Masach that had Behinat Aviut de Behina Dalet and has
completely purified necessarily went through the same four degrees
one by one. Also, the Ohr Elyon never stops shining even for a
moment, except it is not discerned in the Olamot unless there is a
proper receiver to receive its Ohr.
For that reason we discern that the Ohr Elyon mates with the Masach
as it passes through the four degrees found from Behina Dalet to the
complete purification. It generates four Komot of Ohr on its way
according to the measure of the Aviut that the Masach stands in since
as long as there is some measure of Aviut that merits a Zivug, Ohr
Elyon still connects and clothes it.
Also, when the Koma departs, though it certainly leaves at once, we
still discern four stops along its way. For example: when it purifies
from Behina Dalet to Behina Gimel, when Komat Keter disappears
from the Partzuf, since there are five degrees, KHB, ZA and Malchut
in Komat Keter, we discern four stops on its way as in the order of its
Histalkut.
Keter in the Koma disappears first and only the lower nine Sefirot
remain there. You then find that Hochma rose to the place of Keter
and Bina to the place of Hochma etc. until Malchut in the place of ZA.
Afterwards the Hochma disappears from the Koma and then Bina
ascends to the place of Keter and ZA to the place of Hochma. After
that ZA too disappears from the Koma and Malchut rises to the place
of Keter.
Finally, Malchut too disappears from the Koma and you find that the
entire Komat Keter has departed from the Partzuf. Thus, even in
Komat we discern that it makes four stops during its Histalkut.
Before the Masach comes to the Aviut de Behina Gimel only one
Behina of Hizdakchut is discernible there. That Hizdakchut rejects and

--- PAGE 62 ---
expels the Ohr Hozer as it is then unfit for Zivug, as it is occupied in
its purification from that attribute.
It is also known that the Masach de Tabur of the above Hitpashtut
Aleph that purified and reached the Peh was incorporated in all the
Reshimot of the Eser Sefirot de Guf except Behina Dalet, which did
not leave its Reshimot of bestowal. All that was left of her was the
Reshimo de Hitlabshut, see Ohr Pnimi item 9 throughout as all of it is
needed here.
It explains there that we regard primarily the highest Behina in them,
which is Behina Gimel that extends Komat Hochma. However, there is
Behinat Reshimo de Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut too there, called
Behinat Zachar de Kli de Keter.
On the one hand it is much higher than Behina Gimel, since it is from
Behinat Komat Keter. However, since it does not have the Behinat
Aviut of Hamshacha it must connect with a Behinat Nekeva, meaning
with Behinat Aviut of Hamshacha, which is the Reshimo of Behina
Gimel that has Behinat Hamshacha too.
Now we shall come to the heart of the examination of the Rav’s
words. He says, “in the beginning the Ohr comes in Keter and nine
Orot are contained in Him.”
There are two things to discern here: A – Why has the order been
reversed here from what it was in Hitpashtut Aleph? There the Ohr
came into Malchut first, and here it began to expand in Keter first. B –
Why did all the Orot come each into its designated Kli, and here they
all came together into one Kli of the Keter?
Indeed, if we understand where these Kelim came here from, these
two above questions will be clarified simply. We must know that the
Rav speaks briefly and says that the Orot expanded back to the empty
Kelim after the Orot have departed from within them. This means that
it does not only speak of the first Partzuf where the Histalkut
occurred.

--- PAGE 63 ---
However, this is a matter of a special Partzuf, completely separated
from the first Partzuf. This is because the first Partzuf is called
Partzuf Galgalta de AK and this Hitpashtut Bet is called Partzuf AB de
AK. It is considered a child and a progeny of the first Partzuf since
this Hitpashtut Bet was born and came out of this Zivug.
The Rav has already thoroughly explained to us the order of that Zivug
(items 9-15). We should not repeat the words, but we must understand
the rule that the whole matter of the Histalkut of the Orot and the
empty Kelim that remained, spoken of in the first Partzuf, all that
already belongs to the second Partzuf.
This is so because there is no absence in the spiritual and any matter
of Shinui Tzura discerned in the spirituals means additional Tzura, not
an absence or replacement. Hence, all these empty Kelim spoken of in
the first Partzuf are the Kelim of this Hitpashtut Bet, where the Orot
return and expand a second time.
Thus, the Zivugim were made on the Masach contained of the two
Reshimot mentioned in the Rav’s words above, which are the Reshimo
de Behina Dalet, called Zachar, and the Reshimo de Behina Gimel,
called Nekeva. Afterwards these two Komot expanded into the Kli de
Keter that remained empty from the time of Hitpashtut Aleph, and this
Hitpashtut Bet was contained in those two Komot.
All the Komot were contained in Komat Keter in Hitpashtut Aleph,
and all four Komot HB ZON came out through the Hizdakchut Masach
of the Aviut de Behina Dalet, which is Komat Keter. Similarly here, all
nine Sefirot are contained in the first Koma of Zachar and Nekeva that
came out inside the Kli de Keter.
This is so because afterwards that Masach de Behina Dalet and
Behina Gimel purified and the Zachar and Nekeva came out to the Kli
of Hochma etc. similarly, just as it was in the order of Hitpashtut
Aleph.
Now you can simply understand that it was not possible for the Koma
de Behina Gimel and Behina Dalet, which are close to the degree of
Keter (see item 9) to clothe Kli de Hochma, which is much smaller

--- PAGE 64 ---
than them. Also, they have no interest in clothing the Komot HB ZON
since every single Sefira from those Eser Sefirot de Zachar and
Nekeva are of the same Koma. In other words, each of them is close to
Komat Keter, and how can any of them clothe the other low Komot
HB ZA and Malchut.
Lo Matei, when the Ohr that reaches the Keter exits there once
more.
It is because the Masach of Behina Dalet de Zachar purified to Behina
Gimel and the Masach de Behina Gimel of the Nekeva to Behina Bet.
Hence, the two Komot de Zachar and Nekeva de Keter departed and
this is the meaning of his words, “the Ohr that reaches the Keter
exits there once more.” This matter of Hizdakchut that happened in
the Zachar and Nekeva de Keter is also because of the Bitush and
Hakaa de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi as in Hitpashtut Aleph.
The nine other Orot remained in Keter.
It means that the above Aviut of Behina Bet remains in it, where the
Zivug that comes out on this Aviut elicits Komat Bina and Bina
contains within it Komat ZA and Malchut, which are eight Orot. There
is also Behina Gimel of the Zachar de Keter. Thus there are nine Orot
in Kli de Keter that remains after the Hizdakchut of her own Behina.
Lo Matei in the Keter, Keter extends the nine Orot to Hochma
Panim be Panim.
You already know that these Kelim de Hitpashtut Bet are the same
empty Kelim that remained after Hitpashtut Aleph. Also, the order of
the making of these Kelim has been explained in the Rav’s words
above (item 26).
First, Malchut was made since she was the first to be emptied of her
Ohr. Afterwards, when Kli de ZA was emptied from its Ohr the Kli de
ZA was made. Then, when Kli de Bina was emptied, the Kli de Bina
was made etc.
The reason for it is that it did not rise and depart with the Ohr Yashar,
as the Rav explained above (Part 4, Chap 2, item 7). Hence, each and

--- PAGE 65 ---
every Kli was made with the Histalkut Ohr from inside it since then
the Ohr Av remained below and became a Kli.
You find that the Kelim were arranged from the time they were made
one above the other: Malchut first, ZA atop her, Bina atop him, up to
Kli Keter above all. Hence, know that here too in Hitpashtut Bet, even
before the Orot expanded, the Kelim are already arranged and stand
from above downward, Keter at their head and finally Malchut,
meaning as they came out in Hitpashtut Aleph.
Thus, when the Orot expanded and came out of the Zivug de Komat
Keter and Hochma, where all these Eser Sefirot were on an equal
Koma, close to Keter, they’ve found the Kli de Keter suited for them
standing ready for them.
While Lo Matei in the Keter means that the Behina Dalet de Zachar
de Keter purified and Behina Gimel de Nukva de Keter, the Komat
Keter de Zachar and Komat Hochma de Nukva departed. It follows
that all these Eser Sefirot de Zachar and Nekeva lost, the Komat Keter
in them and the Eser Sefirot de Zachar were diminished into Komat
Hochma, and the Eser Sefirot de Nekeva diminished into Komat Bina.
Thus, this Koma is no longer ascribed to the Keter at all, but to Kli de
Hochma. Therefore the Keter pours them to the Kli de Hochma, as the
Rav says.
Yet, we must understand how the Orot extend from the Kli de Keter to
the Kli de Hochma. After all, there is a great distance between these
Kelim. Kli de Keter is in Aviut de Behina Gimel, and it is known that
Shinui Tzura separates and distances the spirituals.
Thus, how do they touch one another so as to be able to bestow upon
each other? We must not be mistaken to say that the Kli de Keter
purified to Behina Gimel and thus became equal with the Kli de
Hochma since it is known that no Hizdakchut is applied in the Kelim
whatsoever. The whole issue of the above Hizdakchut relates only to
the Masach in the Kelim, not to the Kelim themselves.

--- PAGE 66 ---
However, we must remember what the Rav explained above (item 15
and in Ohr Pnimi), and then the Kli turns its Panim. It has been
explained there that when the Ohr leaves the Kli, the Kli turns its
Panim downward and its Achoraim upward, the Panim of the Kli
becomes the Achor and the Achor becomes the Panim, and examine it
there.
Here, however, the Ohr that belongs to Kli de Keter departed because
the Behina Dalet de Zachar and Behina Gimel de Nekeva have
departed and a Zivug was made on the Behina Gimel de Zachar and
Behina Bet de Nekeva. After that the Kli de Keter turned its Panim
downward, which is the great Aviut that was in it. Its entire Panim and
importance has now become very bad, and Achor, meaning the pure
side of it has become the most important.
Now you can see that after the Kli de Keter turned its Achoraim
upward, it equalized with the Kli de Hochma. This is because the
whole Shinui Tzura that was in Kli de Keter is the great Aviut of
Behina Dalet and Behina Gimel in it, for this is its entire merit over
the Kli de Hochma. Now all that Aviut has been annulled from it
because of the turning of its Panim downward, and thus it is now
considered equalized in form with Hochma.
It is written, “Keter extends the nine Orot to Hochma Panim be
Panim.” It implies that because of the Histalkut Ohr Keter, Kli de
Keter has turned its Panim downward. Therefore, it is standing Panim
be Panim with Kli de Hochma.
This is so because now too the Panim de Keter is the Behina Bet and
Behina Gimel, meaning that pure side that prior to that was the
Behinat Achor of Keter. In fact, it is equal to the Panim de Hochma;
hence it can pour the Ohr to Hochma, as they are in Hishtavut Tzura
with one another. This is the reason that the Rav wrote above that any
giving of Orot is always in Behinat Panim be Panim.
The matter of these nine Orot that Hochma received from Keter has
already been explained above. They are the remains of the Aviut that
was left of the Zachar de Keter after its Hizdakchut.

--- PAGE 67 ---
This is Behinat Reshimo de Hochma of the first Hitpashtut that was
contained in the Zachar de Keter (see Ohr Pnimi item 6), and this is
one Ohr. Also, she received the rest of the Aviut de Nekeva de Keter,
which is Behina Bet and Komat Bina where the two Komot are
incorporated, de ZA and de Malchut. They are eight Orot together and
with the Behina Gimel de Zachar, they are nine Orot.
Hochma turns her Panim, after receiving the nine Orot, and shines
to Bina.
This refers to the turning of the Panim only of the Zachar de Hochma,
not the Behinat Nekeva de Hochma. This is so because the turning of
the Panim means Hizdakchut of the Aviut and the Histalkut Ohr from
there since then the Kli turns its Panim downward, as the Rav says
(item 15).
In that state the Masach de Aviut de Behina Gimel of the Zachar
purifies into Behinat Aviut of Behina Bet and you find that the Kli de
Zachar turns its Panim downward and its Achoraim upward. It means
that the importance of Behinat Gadlut of the Aviut in it is cancelled
(see Ohr Pnimi item 15).
At that time that residue de Zachar de Hochma is poured to the Kli de
Bina. This is the meaning of Hochma turning her Panim after having
received the nine Orot and shining to Bina, meaning the Behinat
Zachar of the Kli de Bina.
However, the Rav did not explain any Hizdakchut in the Zachar de Kli
de Keter. Rather, he wrote it along with the Nekeva de Keter in a
single Hizdakchut.
This is so because the Zachar de Keter does not have any Behinat
Aviut of Hamshacha, but only from Behinat Hitlabshut, and there is
no Hizdakchut in its own Behinat Hitlabshut since there is no Behinat
Aviut in it. Instead, it is incorporated and connects with the Aviut of
the Nekeva (Ohr Pnimi item 9, par. “However”). Thus, the matter of
its Hizdakchut comes along with the Hizdakchut of the Masach of the
Nekeva, therefore the Rav write them as a single Hizdakchut.

--- PAGE 68 ---
However, the Zachar de Kli de Hochma, which is the Behinat
Reshimo de Ohr Hochma that remains in Hitpashtut Aleph as in the
previous item, also has Behinat Aviut de Hamshacha. For that reason
it is necessary that it will purify before the Nekeva purifies since its
measure of Aviut is greater, as it is Behina Gimel and the Nekeva is
Behina Bet.
It is only He’arah, but she still does not give her the seven Orot.
It means that it gives only one Ohr of the Zachar de Kli de Bina since
its time has now come to purify, and it gives its remains to Bina.
However, the time of the Nekeva to purify has not come yet; thus it
does not give the seven Orot related to the Nekeva de Bina, as has
been explained in the previous item.
36. Afterwards the Ohr Keter retuned to being Matei in Keter and Ohr
Hochma was once more concealed in Keter because of its desire to
unite with the Keter. At that time Kli Hochma turned its Panim to
Keter and gave it its Ohr. Yet, Ohr Bina that was in Hochma does
not rise to Keter with it because of the craving of the sons, of
which she is the mother.
We have already explained that there is return of Panim and
Achor only in Behinat Kelim. However, in the Orot themselves
there is no Panim and Achor, only Hitpashtut and Histalkut.
Ohr Pnimi
36. Matei in Keter and Ohr Hochma was once more concealed in Keter.
Interpretation: when Hochma purified and her Ohr de Zachar and
Nekeva departed and rose to the Keter, Nukva de Keter returned to
thicken in her Aviut de Behina Gimel and Ohr Hochma was elicited to
Kli de Keter. Thus, the Ohr was once more Matei in the Keter.
The reason for it is because the Zachar of the Hochma that rose to the
Kli de Keter is Behinat Reshimo that remained from the Hitpashtut
Aleph from the Aviut de Behina Gimel that was there. Thus, it rose and
was incorporated in the Nekeva de Keter that was also Behinat Aviut
de Behina Gimel before it purified. Hence, because of the present

--- PAGE 69 ---
ascent of the Zachar de Hochma, its previous Aviut has now returned
and the Zivug Elyon on it returned.
Hochma turned its Panim to Keter and gave it its Ohr.
This means that the Hochma returned her Panim up against the Keter.
Afterwards she returned and purified once more from her Behina Bet
too and the Komat Bina disappeared from her and came to the Keter.
It is so because prior to that he says that Hochma turned her Panim
down toward Bina because of the Hizdakchut Zachar de Hochma.
He tells us that after Bina received the remains de Zachar de Hochma,
Kli de Hochma returned her Panim toward Keter once more. This is
because there was still Komat Ohr Bina in the Aviut de Behina Bet in
her from which she has not purified.
Rather, after she returned her Panim to Keter, her time to purify from
Behina Bet arrived. Then Komat Ohr Bina disappeared as well, which
she gave to the Keter.
Ohr Bina that was in Hochma does not rise to Keter with it.
This refers to Ohr ZA ascribed to Kli de Bina. However, Ohr Bina
does not belong to Bina in Hitpashtut Bet, but to Hochma. It is written
that the Kli de Hochma gave her Ohr to Keter, meaning her Ohr Bina.
This is so because she purified from Behina Bet and all that was left in
her is the Aviut de Behina Aleph, which is Ohr of Komat ZA, which
belongs to Kli de Bina. He says about that Ohr that it remained in Kli
de Hochma and did not rise to Keter. The Rav calls it Ohr Bina
because it is related to Kli de Bina.
37. Yet, after Kli Hochma turned his Panim opposite Keter and his
Ohr rose there, he then turned his Panim down opposite Bina and
gave her the seven Orot. You should also know that any giving of
Orot is always regarded as Panim be Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
37. His Panim down opposite Bina and gave her the seven Orot.

--- PAGE 70 ---
The matter of the Histalkut Ohr from Kli de Hochma causes the
turning of his Panim down. This is considered Hishtavut with the
Panim de Bina since he cancelled his prior Panim, meaning his
Behina Bet and turned his Achor, namely Behina Aleph, into Behinat
Panim.
It follows that now it is Panim be Panim with Bina and can therefore
give her the Koma of Behina Aleph which is Komat ZA. Now she is
named after the highest Sefira, being Ohr Hesed, containing all seven
lower Sefirot HGT NHYM.
It is written, “turned his Panim down opposite Bina and gave her
the seven Orot.” Now there are eight Orot in Bina. Those are the
remains of the Ohr Zachar that she received from the Hochma, which
is Behina Bet. This is in addition to the seven lower ones contained in
Behina Aleph that have now received from the Nekeva de Hochma,
thus eight Orot.
Any giving of Orot is always regarded as Panim be Panim.
It has been explained above that the giver and the receiver should
equalize their Tzura with one another. Hence, as long as his Panim are
upward he is much higher than the receiver and they do not touch each
other. For that reason he does not give except if he cancels his Panim
and places his Achor forward.
In that state the Panim of the giver and the receiver are equal. This is
called Panim be Panim. Examine the interpretation of the matter
carefully in Ohr Pnimi item 15.
38. However, Bina did not turn her Panim to shine in Hesed below
since there was no power in Hesed and VAK to receive such a great
Ohr Panim be Panim, only Achor be Achor. This is so because
there is Ohr of VAK here and the Ohr of Bina which is greater
than all of them together.
Yet, in the beginning when there were still no Orot in Bina except
what she gave to Hochma, she turned her Panim and illuminated
to Bina only He’arah Panim be Panim. This is not so in Hesed

--- PAGE 71 ---
since Bina has the strength to receive their Orot, as the seven Orot
Tachtonim were annulled with respect to her Ohr, and she can
certainly receive her own Ohr.
The Ohr of Hochma, though his Ohr is greater than her Ohr, you
already know that Abba ve Ima “stay as one and come out as one”
and she can receive the Ohr Hochma. It is not so in Hesed since
there is a big difference between that and the Ohr Bina, and he
cannot receive it Panim be Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
38. Bina did not turn her Panim to shine in Hesed below since there
was no power.
You should know that here in Bina there are three Orot: The first is the
Ohr Zachar that she received from the Hizdakchut Zachar de
Hochma, which is Behina Bet.
The second is the Behinat Reshimo de Kli Bina herself as there is in
each and every Kli from the time of Hitpashtut Aleph. This is
considered the Behinat Nekeva of Bina.
The third is the Ohr Hesed, meaning the Komat ZA that she now
received from the remains of the Hizdakchut of Behina Bet de Kli de
Hochma. This is considered Behinat progeny of Bina and not at all
from the Behinat Ohr Bina. This third Ohr is called VAK whose
property is that lacks He’arat GAR, meaning the Ohr Hochma, and it
has only Behinat Hassadim.
It is written, “Bina did not turn her Panim to shine in Hesed below
since there was no power in Hesed and VAK to receive such a great
Ohr Panim be Panim.” It means that now the Ohr Hesed is in Katnut,
meaning only Ohr Hassadim without any He’arat GAR. This is so
because it comes out of the Zivug on Masach de Behina Aleph that
does not have He’arat Hochma.
For that reason it does not have the power to receive anything from
the Bina, comes down and clothes the Kelim de VAK. Consequently, it
still remains in Kli Bina and did not expand to Kli de Hesed.

--- PAGE 72 ---
The seven Orot Tachtonim were annulled with respect to her Ohr.
It means that although Bina received the Ohr Hesed within her, which
is the Ohr of the seven lower Sefirot that lack GAR, she still did not
lose the Ohr of her own GAR because of that. This is because the Ohr
ZAT is cancelled in her compared to her own great Ohr, which are her
own Zachar and Nukva from Behina Bet.
The Ohr of Hochma, though his Ohr is greater than her Ohr.
This revolves around the Zachar de Kli de Hochma (see item 35) and
it is called Ohr Hochma. This is because the above matter of the
Hizdakchut regarding the Zachar de Hochma is Behinat Zivug
between the Zachar and the Nukva of Hochma where by mating them
together the Ohr Zachar de Bina was born.
The Nukva de Kli de Hochma has Koma de Behina Bet and the Zachar
de Hochma has Koma de Behina Gimel. Thus, when the Zachar
purified from Behina Gimel to Behina Bet, you find that it equalized
its Koma to its Nukva.
At that time they were both mingled together in a common Masach de
Behina Bet and the Zivug de Hakaa was made on it. Thus, a new
Koma de Behina Bet was elicited, made of the Zachar and Nekeva
together.
This new Koma is that which descended and became the Zachar de
Kli de Bina. Its Koma is equal with the Nekeva de Kli de Hochma,
hence it is called Ohr Hochma. This is the meaning of, “and she can
receive the Ohr Hochma,” meaning the Behinat Zachar, whose
Koma is equal to the Ohr Bina in Kli de Hochma.
Abba ve Ima “stay as one and come out as one”.
This is because even Bina de Ohr Yashar is considered Etzem Hochma
de Ohr Yashar, much less here, when Hochma too has only Komat
Bina.
39. Let us return to the matter that when it returns to being Lo Matei
in Keter, it is then Matei in Hochma and Ohr of Hochma descends
in it. Then the seven sons in Bina are grown and do not need their

--- PAGE 73 ---
mother. At that time Bina ascends to Hochma due to her desire to
cleave to her.
This is called Lo Matei in the Ohr Bina. After that Bina turns her
Panim downward, the seven Orot in her descend and all are given
to Hesed Panim be Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
39. Lo Matei in Keter, it is then Matei in Hochma and Ohr of Hochma
descends in it.
This is because the Aviut de Behina Gimel of the Nukva de Keter
returned and purified. At that time the Kli de Keter turns its Panim
downward and once more gives its remains, meaning Behina Bet, to
the Hochma as before. It follows, that the Ohr of Hochma descends
once more as in the beginning.
The seven sons in Bina are grown and do not need their mother.
At that time Bina ascends to Hochma.
After the Ohr Hochma descended to Kli de Hochma this He’arah
reaches Kli de Bina too for the above reason that Abba ve Ima come
out as one. In other words, they emerge on a single Behinat Aviut,
hence “stay as one,” meaning their Koma is the same.
Since the He’arah reached Bina, it receives Ohr Hesed for this
He’arat Hochma as well. At this time it attains his Behinat Gadlut,
meaning Behinat GAR de VAK.
He writes, “Then the seven sons in Bina are grown and do not need
their mother.” This is because once they have attained He’arat
Hochma they have become grown since they have acquired Behinat
Rosh. This is why they do not need their mother.
Prior to that the VAK were Behinat Ohr de Hassadim without any
He’arat Hochma. Thus, they needed to receive their sustenance from
the Kli de Bina, which is Behinat GAR and Behinat Atzmut.
They could not separate the Kli de Bina from the Kelim de VAK
because of the lack of sustenance, as there is no sustenance and

--- PAGE 74 ---
Atzmut except in Behinat Hochma. However, now that they have
attained Hochma they have become grown and have stance and power
to expand in the Kelim.
At that time Bina ascends to Hochma.
This is because it is impossible for the Elyon to bestow upon the
Tachton except by turning the Panim, meaning to equalize with the
Tachton. At that time it is considered close to it and gives it its
remains.
Thus, Bina ascends to Hochma, meaning the Zachar and the Nukva of
Bina purify from their Behina Bet to Behina Aleph. Now Behina Aleph
has become the Panim and thus Kli de Bina is found Panim be Panim
with the Kli de Hesed as they are now both from Aviut de Behina
Aleph, which is called Panim be Panim.
At that time the Zachar and the Nekeva of Kli de Bina depart and rise
to the Kli de Hochma. Hochma and Bina are then found in one Kli of
Behinat Hochma, and thus there is the dominion of the Kli of Hochma
in the Partzuf.
There is yet another profundity here: In fact, the Behinat Bina is
discerned as the Achoraim to the Hochma from the Shoresh of the Ohr
Yashar. It is the meaning of the Yod י and Nun נ of the Tzadik צ being
opposite to one another as it is written in the Zohar (Bereshit). It is
also as the Rav implies here in the meaning of “because He delighteth
in mercy.”
This means that Bina craves Hassadim more than Hochma and
therefore had to ascend to the Kli de Hochma so as not to stop at the
Ohr Hesed with her Behinat Achoraim. At that time Ohr Hesed can
receive a greater He’arah than the Hochma.
40. Afterwards the Ohr returns to being Matei in Keter and then both
HB ascend there because of the desire they have. In that state you
find that there is a big distance between the sons and the Ohr GAR
for there are two distances between them, Bina and Hochma,
which have no Ohr in them.

--- PAGE 75 ---
Hence, at that time Ohr Hesed ascends to Bina and is called Lo
Matei in Hesed. In that state the Kli Hesed turns its Panim and
gives the six Orot below in Gevura.
Ohr Pnimi
40. The Ohr returns to being Matei in Keter and the both HB ascend
there.
This is because Hochma purified once more from the Aviut de Behina
Dalet in the Masach in her and the Orot departed from there and rose
to the Keter. This caused the awakening of the Aviut in Nukva de
Keter by the force of the Reshimo de Zachar de Hochma that rose
inside her being Behina Gimel.
For that reason she received the Aviut de Behina Gimel in her once
more, the Komat Hochma expanded to her once more and the Ohr
Hochma Matei in Kli de Keter. Know, that the Rav names the
Hizdakchut of the Aviut by the name “craving to rise to the Elyon”
because Hizdakchut and ascent are one and the same.
Two distances between them, Bina and Hochma, which have no
Ohr.
In order explain the matter of these two distances that were made
because of the ascent of HB to Keter and in order to make it possible
to continue to explain the Rav’s words I must elaborate here. It is in
order to comprehensively clarify in a thorough understanding the
attribute of these ten Kelim that remained from Hitpashtut Aleph de
AK after the Histalkut of their Orot within them and their setting here
in the Partzuf de Hitpashtut Bet de AK.
Most importantly, we must thoroughly understand the matter of Panim
and Achor of those Kelim for until now we explained only from the
Behinat Aviut in the Masach that mates with the Ohr Elyon. The
greatest Aviut in the degree is its Panim, and its least measure of Aviut
is in the Achor of the degree.
Now we shall explain the Panim and Achor in the property of the
Kelim in themselves, according to how they were affected by the

--- PAGE 76 ---
Hitpashtut and Histalkut de Hitpashtut Aleph.
The primary disclosure of the forces in the ways of the Orot comes
mostly through the property of the Kelim themselves, hence the Kelim
are called tubes. They are like the nature of the water that adopt their
form through the Tzinorot (pl. for Tzinor) by which they come,
whether abundantly or scantly, whether to the east or to the west. Also,
the Orot are activated in the properties of the Kelim they are clothed
in, hence, we must understand them thoroughly.
You find that the Ohr Keter in Hitpashtut Aleph did not come back
down to Hitpashtut Bet, but remained standing in the Rosh under the
Malchut of the Rosh. When ZON de Kli de Keter of Hitpashtut Bet
should rise and receive their Shefa, he turns his Panim to them,
meaning he gives them all that they need.
However, it is only while they are with him in the Malchut of the
Rosh. After they are filled with their Shefa and descend to the Guf, he
immediately turns his Achoraim to them, meaning he denies them of
the Shefa that they need.
We must understand that thing. If he prevents the Shefa from them
once more, how has the ascent to the Rosh helped? The thing is that
indeed they received their fill during the ascent, meaning according to
the Masachim in them, which are Behina Dalet de Zachar and Behina
Gimel de Nekeva. That Komat Zivug is close to Komat Keter and they
descended to Keter de Guf with all this great Shefa.
However, we must therefore understand what was the benefit in that
root Keter turning its Achoraim to ZON de Keter that descended to the
Guf. Indeed, much is done because of that: because of it the Kli de
Keter de Guf must be in Behinat Achoraim toward Hochma as well
because this Kli is indeed the Kli of that root Keter from the time of
Hitpashtut Aleph. After all, it is from her that he departed and rose to
the Rosh.
By so doing he operates on her when he is in the Rosh too, as she
equalizes with him as he stands at the Rosh. For that reason the Kli too
must be in Behinat Achoraim to all the lower nine Sefirot from her.

--- PAGE 77 ---
This means that she does not give them from that Shefa that she
received in the Rosh, except through the Achoraim, meaning by
preventing the He’arat Hochma from them. This is because Hochma
is always called Ohr Panim, or Ohr GAR, and remember that in all the
places. Thus, the nine lower Sefirot cannot receive from the Keter but
only Behinat VAK, meaning lacking He’arat Hochma, and examine
thoroughly.
The meaning of Panim and Achor de Kelim is simple: the place of
bestowal in it is called Panim, and that Behina through which it does
not bestow is called Achor. It is like a person who negotiates with his
friend; he stands opposite him, at his fore side, not behind him.
Yet, you will understand that even though the Keter bestows through
its Achoraim, you can once call it Panim even though it has no
He’arat Hochma, meaning the side that is the place of bestowal.
Hence, we must understand it only according to the relevant matter.
The Masach de Keter purified from the Aviut de Behina Dalet and
Behina Gimel in it to Behina Gimel and Behina Bet, fitting for the Ohr
Hochma. At that time the Kli de Keter must turn its Panim downward
and its Achoraim upward. This is because its Achoraim detain the
He’arat Hochma completely because of the root Keter of the Rosh
that stands under Malchut de Rosh.
However, the cause of the above turning of the Panim is the matter of
the Hizdakchut of the Masach de Zachar de Keter, which is the
Reshimo that the root Keter left in this Kli de Keter after its Histalkut
from it. Since that Reshimo departed from there because it purified
and came to Aviut de Behina Gimel, the dominion of the root Keter on
its Kli stopped.
At that time the Kli turns its Panim downward and everything that is
ascribed to the He’ara of the root Keter ascends once more to it, to the
Rosh. The remains, meaning the Reshimo de Behina Gimel de
Hitpashtut Aleph, which is the Zachar de Hochma, and the He’arat
new Zivug that came out on the Aviut de Behina Gimel that the Nukva

--- PAGE 78 ---
de Keter left after her Hizdakchut, became the Nekeva de Kli de
Hochma.
Now we shall explain the Panim and Achor of the Kli de Hochma.
Hochma’s conduct is to bestow only Hochma. Hence, the place of the
bestowal of Hochma is her Panim and the place of bestowal of Ohr
Hassadim is her Behinat Achoraim.
In other words, it is the complete opposite from Keter. The Panim of
Keter is to bestow VAK and He’arat GAR is in her Achor. At the same
time the Panim de Hochma is He’arat GAR from the Behinat Ohr
Hochma and her Achor is He’arat VAK.
The Panim and Achor de Keter of Bina is also opposite from Kli de
Hochma though not completely opposite since the Shoresh of Bina is
Etzem Hochma. However, her nature is to always yearn for Ohr
Hassadim, as the Rav has written regarding “because He delighteth in
mercy.”
Bina is called “He” and she craves and wants Hassadim. Hence, when
she has Hassadim in the Partzuf, she becomes Etzem Hochma once
more, as the Rav wrote above regarding “Abba ve Ima stay as one
and come out as one.”
However, Kli de Bina is primarily distinguished by her craving for
Hassadim, hence her Panim is He’arat Hassadim and her Achor is
He’arat Hochma, the opposite of Kli de Hochma.
Now we shall briefly explain the Kelim of the seven lower Sefirot
HGT NHYM. You must remember the Rav’s words above (Part 4,
Chap 6 item 8) that ZA has only five Ktzavot, being five Hassadim
from Hesed to Hod though Yesod does not take its own private Hesed,
but all five Ktzavot are incorporated in it.
In essence, there are two general Orot in all the degrees, which are
Ohr Hochma and Ohr Hassadim. There are also five Behinot Aviut in
the Masach according to the five Behinot de Ohr Yashar called KHB
Tifferet and Malchut.

--- PAGE 79 ---
These five Behinot are called KHB TM only when the GAR are
Behinat Ohr Hochma. However, in a place where all those five
Behinot contain only Ohr de Hassadim, they are called HGT NH. The
names of the first three Behinot KHB have been changed to HGT and
the names of the last two Behinot Tifferet and Malchut have been
changed to Netzah and Hod.
He writes, “they are five Hassadim from Hesed to Hod.” This means
that even the First three Behinot are also only Ohr Hassadim and not
Ohr Hochma at all, and understand and remember that. The Yesod and
the Malchut are only two containers of the above five Ktzavot.
One container is from the perspective of their being five sweetened
Hassadim in Midat ha Rachamim, and one container is from the
perspective of their being in Midat ha Din. At that time they are called
five Gevurot or that the five Hassadim and five Gevurot are contained
together.
However, in order to understand the attributes of these five Ktzavot we
need the Rav’s words here regarding Matei ve Lo Matei for they were
not explained anywhere else in all of the Rav’s writings. Hence, these
words of his need close attention.
Let us clarify once more the birth of the first Hesed of these five
Hassadim, brought in the Rav’s words (item 37). ZON de Hochma
departed to Keter since the Aviut de Behina Bet purified to Behina
Aleph and its Zivug raises only Ohr de VAK that are now contained in
the first Hesed. At that time the Kli de Hochma turned its Panim
downward since it cancelled its Behinat Panim and turned its
Achoraim upward.
This means that its previous Achor, meaning He’arat Hassadim, has
now become a place of bestowal. By that it equalized itself with the
Panim of Bina, as it is written, “because He delighteth in mercy.” In
that state he gave her the seven Orot that are now contained in the first
Ohr Hesed. Thus, Ohr Hesed is found in Kli de Bina.
You must remember that besides this Ohr Hesed there are two other
Orot that precede it in that Kli de Bina. They are the Zachar, born of

--- PAGE 80 ---
the Zivug ZON de Kli de Hochma, which is truly Behina Bet, Komat
Bina like the Nekeva de Hochma herself.
However, since he is born through the turning of the Panim de Kli de
Hochma (see the Rav’s words item 35 and in Ohr Pnimi there) it is
thus considered Behinat VAK of Hochma. You should also know that
he is the Shoresh de Israel Saba in all the Partzufim.
There is yet another, second Ohr there, being the Reshimo de Kli de
Bina, which is there from the time of Hitpashtut Aleph. [Besides the
Masach being incorporated of all the Reshimot in those Kelim as it
travels to the Maatzil, it is certain that the majority of the Reshimot
remained in their place in their own Kelim and did not ascend with the
Masach to the Maatzil.]
That Reshimo is the Behinat Nekeva that exists in Kli de Bina, and you
should know that she is the Shoresh to all the Behinot of Tvuna in all
the Partzufim. However, this Ohr Hesed that Hochma now gave to
Bina is considered the son of Bina and not actually her.
Keep in mind the relationship between the ZON in Kli de Hochma
with the ZON in Kli de Bina, as in fact they are Ohr of the same Koma
of Bina. However, ZON de Bina relate to ZON de Hochma as Israel
Saba ve Tvuna relate to Upper AVI. The YESHSUT are only the VAK
of AVI themselves though they are both discerned as one Koma of
Aviut de Behina Bet.
From this you can see that the primary division of AVI and YESHSUT
to two Partzufim GAR and VAK is only to procreate the Katnut of the
seven lower Sefirot. This is because it is impossible for Kli de Hochma
to dispense the Ohr Hesed, which is Behinat VAK without GAR if not
through the Achoraim of Hochma.
Hence, it turns the Panim backwards, and this inversion divides the
Kli de Hochma into two Partzufim: Partzuf GAR, where the Panim
remain in their place, and Partzuf VAK de Hochma, which turned its
Panim backward, giving Ohr VAK that lacks GAR. YESHSUT is also
named VAK after the inversion of the Panim de Kli de Hochma.

--- PAGE 81 ---
However, in order to procreate the Gadlut of ZA, meaning the GAR
that belong to those five Hassadim, Kli de Hochma must return its
Panim upward once more as in the beginning. Then it is considered
that ZON de Bina and the ZON of Hochma that were divided into GAR
and VAK due to the inversion of the Panim de Hochma, now the
Hochma returned and revoked that inversion of the Panim. Now there
is no longer dispensing of GAR and dispensing of VAK in the Kli de
Hochma.
You find that ZON de Bina return and rise to ZON de Hochma and
become one Partzuf once more. Know, that this matter is implemented
in the Partzufim of Atzilut as well.
When AVI want to dispense Mochin de GAR to the ZA, AVI and
YESHSUT become one Partzuf once more. This too is for the above
reason that the He’arat VAK was cancelled from the Hochma and the
Panim returned to its place as in the beginning.
From the explained you can thoroughly understand the order of the
birth of the first Ohr Hesed in its Behinat Gadlut brought in the Rav’s
words (item 39). To summarize his words, it returned to being Lo
Matei in Keter and then Matei in Hochma when Ohr of Hochma that
was in Keter descended to Hochma. At that time the sons in Bina are
grown and then Bina ascends to Hochma because of the craving in her
to cleave to her, the seven Orot descend and are given to the Hesed
Panim be Panim.
Interpretation: The ZON de Keter purified once more and departed to
the root Keter that stands under Malchut de Rosh. At that time the Kli
de Keter turned its Panim below and gave its remains, being ZON de
Hochma, to the Kli de Hochma.
The Behinat Panim of ZON de Hochma returned to its place as in the
beginning and then “Bina ascends to Hochma.” It means that Bina
and Hochma have become one Partzuf, similar to AVI and YESHSUT
that became one Partzuf.
Consequently, that Hesed in Kli de Bina receives the He’arat Ohr
Hochma since the Kli is united with the Ohr Hochma. You find that

--- PAGE 82 ---
Hesed returned to Behinat GAR, which is called that it has become
grown.
He writes, “Then the seven sons in Bina are grown and do not need
their mother.” That means that they have acquired Behinat He’arat
Hochma and GAR, and in that the ZAT are discerned as grown.
It has already been explained above that before the Ohr Hesed
acquires the Gadlut it cannot spread below. This is because it cannot
separate from the Kli de Bina which is its entire sustenance and
Atzmut in the Behinat GAR. Hence, it is considered to need its Ima,
though now that it has already attained the Ohr Hochma itself it no
longer needs the sucking of the Kli de Bina, hence, it is written, “and
do not need their mother.”
At that time the Kli of Bina turned her Panim downward and the seven
Orot in her descend and all of them are given to Hesed Panim be
Panim. You must remember that the Behinat Panim de Kli de Bina is
for He’arat Hassadim and her Achor is for He’arat Hochma.
When she is in that state she cannot administer He’arat Ohr Hesed
with He’arat Hochma. However, it has been explained that the
returning of the Panim de Kli of Hochma instigated the unification of
the two Kelim Bina and Hochma into one because the Kli de Hochma
has already cancelled her He’arat VAK.
Hence, you find that the Kli de Bina has inverted her Panim
backwards by the force of this unification. The previous Achor has
now become Behinat Panim. It means that that Achor that prevented
the distribution of He’arat Hochma has now become the dispenser of
He’arat Hochma.
This is because her Kli received that property of Panim and Achor
found in Hochma. For that reason the Bina has now dispensed the ZAT
to Kli de Hesed in He’arat Hochma.
Now you can thoroughly see the attribute of Sefirat Hesed de ZA to its
fullest. The Behinat Etzem of the Kli de Hesed is Behinat Keter de
VAK as it has already been explained that HGT de ZA are the change

--- PAGE 83 ---
of the name of KHB. Yet, KHB de Ohr Hassadim, meaning KHB of
the Koma de Behina Aleph are called HGT.
Thus, Kli de Hesed is Behinat Kli de Keter de ZA though it is still not
considered Keter, only Hochma de ZA. This is because of the Ohr in
it, as it has no Ohr Keter at all, but only He’arat Hochma that it
received when it was in Kli de Bina and united into one with the Kli
de Hochma. This is why it is called Hochma. There are other reasons
too, but there is nothing to add here.
Now we shall explain the order of the emanation of the Kli of Gevura
brought in the Rav’s words here in item 40. He writes, “Afterwards
the Ohr returns to being Matei in Keter and then both HB ascend
there. In that state you find that there is a big distance between
the sons and the Ohr GAR for there are two distances between
them, Bina and Hochma, which have no Ohr in them. Hence, at
that time Ohr Hesed ascends to Bina and is called Lo Matei in
Hesed. In that state the Kli Hesed turns its Panim and gives the six
Orot below in Gevura.” Thus far his words.
You must remember the two issues there are in the matter of the
inversion of the Panim downwards. We have learned above that they
are, one – from the perspective of the Kli, meaning her place of
dispensing, whether Behinat Hochma or Behinat Hassadim and not
Hochma.
The second matter is from the perspective of the Zivug. Concerning
the measure of the Aviut of the Masach, the most Av Behina in the
degree is considered the Panim and the Behinat least Aviut is the
Behinat Achor in that degree.
Accordingly, you always find that the Elyon wants to bestow upon the
Tachton and must turn its Panim downward. This means that he is
purified from the measure of the Aviut in him, which is his Panim, and
remains in a lesser Aviut, equal to the degree of the Aviut of the lower
degree. This is so because then it is considered close to him and can
administer in him.

--- PAGE 84 ---
Now you can see that in every place that the matter of the distribution
of Bina to Kli de Hesed is brought here, Bina purified from Behina Bet
to Behina Aleph. This is because then she is Panim be Panim with the
Kli de Hesed from the Masach side in her. It turns out that when Bina
dispenses the Ohr Hesed to the Kli de Hesed, the Bina purifies to
Behina Aleph.
There was a whole order of gradual Hizdakchut here: First, the Keter
purified from Behina Gimel to Behina Bet at which time the Ohr Keter
disappeared to the Shoresh and gave Behina Bet to Kli de Hochma.
Afterwards Kli de Bina unites with it into one and then Behina Bet too
purifies to Behina Aleph. At that time the Orot de Kelim of Hochma
and Bina disappear to Keter and Behina Aleph is dispensed to Kli de
Hesed in He’arat Hochma.
It has already been explained above that when the four Orot Zachar
and Nekeva de Hochma and the Zachar and Nekeva de Bina rise to the
Keter, they awaken Behinat Aviut de Behina Gimel in the Keter once
more. The Eser Sefirot in Komat Hochma elicits there by the power of
the Zivug Elyon as in the beginning and the Ohr Hochma returns to
Kli de Keter. This is called Matei in the Keter.
You find that at the coming of Hesed to its Kli it causes the existence
of Matei in the Keter. This is because then the Behina Bet in HB
purifies to Behina Aleph and their four Orot rise to Kli de Keter,
inducing a new Zivug there on Komat Behina Gimel. The Ohr
Hochma is once more Matei in the Kli of Keter as in the beginning.
It is written, “Afterwards the Ohr returns to being Matei in Keter
and then both HB ascend there.” It means that because of the ascent
of the four Orot de HB the Ohr is Matei in Kli de Keter.
“In that state you find that there is a big distance between the sons
and the Ohr GAR for there are two distances between them.”
Interpretation: It has been explained that the Panim de Keter is for
He’arat VAK without GAR as it is written, “because He delighteth in
mercy,” (Ohr Pnimi item 40, par “And the Panim”).

--- PAGE 85 ---
These are the two distances that now rest on the Ohr Hesed and
deprive the He’arat GAR from it, which it previously received from
the Hochma. It is written, “In that state you find that there is a big
distance between the sons and the Ohr GAR.”
It means that these two Achoraim de Bina and Keter draw the GAR
very far from the sons, which are ZAT that are contained in the Ohr
Hesed. It is written,”for there are two distances between them, Bina
and Hochma, which have no Ohr.”
In other words, had the Ohr been in Hochma, it would have been
possible for the Ohr Hesed to receive from Hochma and Achor de
Bina would not have prevented it since it did not prevent it in the
beginning. However, now that there is no Ohr even in Hochma due to
the Achoraim de Keter, hence that He’arah that Hesed previously
received is also prevented from Hochma.
He writes, “Hence, at that time Ohr Hesed ascends to Bina.” After
the GAR disappears from the Ohr Hesed and returns to its Katnut, it
needs its Ima Bina once more to suck He’arat GAR of the Kli from
there as in the beginning.
He writes, “In that state the Kli Hesed turns its Panim and gives
the six Orot below in Gevura.” This is because the Panim de Kli de
Hesed is for He’arat Hochma after it received He’arat Hochma, and
its Achor is for He’arat Hassadim.
This is so because in several places where there is Hochma and
Hassadim in the degree, the Hochma is considered Panim and the
Hassadim as Achoraim. For that reason the Achor de Hesed is
considered He’arat Hassadim.
However, now that the He’arat Hochma has disappeared from it and
its Ohr disappeared to Kli de Bina, it turns out that he turned his
Panim downward and gave the remains of the Ohr in it to Kli de
Gevura, and then Matei in Gevura.
Now you can thoroughly understand the property of Sefirat Gevura de
ZA to the fullest. Essentially, the Kli de Gevura is the Behinat Hochma

--- PAGE 86 ---
of the VAK, as has been explained above that the HGT are Behinat
KHB de VAK.
Thus, the Kli de Gevura is indeed considered Behinat Bina. This is so
because its Ohr is Behinat VAK de He’arat Hochma in Hesed, such as
ZON of the Upper Bina, which are Behinat Vav Ktzavot of the Upper
Hochma. Thus, the Ohr of Gevura is Behinat Bina de VAK.
Accordingly, the two Sefirot de ZA, Hesed and Gevura have been
explained. They are Behinat Hochma and Bina of the ZA though their
Kelim have the value of Keter and Hochma.
41. Afterwards it returned to being Lo Matei in Keter, and then it is
Matei in Hochma. At that time Bina is suitable to remain there in
Hochma as in the beginning, but because of the Ohr Hesed in her
place she comes down with him.
It is so “because He delighteth in mercy” and you already know
that Bina is called “He”. When Bina descends in her place, Hesed
does not need her and he descends to his place, and is called Matei
in Hesed.
Then the Ohr Gevura ascends in Hesed and this is called Lo Matei
in Gevura. At that time Kli of Gevura turns her Panim downward
and gives the five Orot below in Tifferet. This is called Matei in
Tifferet.
Ohr Pnimi
41. Lo Matei in Keter.
This is so because the Aviut de Behina Gimel de Nekeva and Behina
Dalet de Zachar in Kli de Keter purified once more. At that time the
ZON de Keter departed to its Shoresh and then turned its Panim
downward.
In other words, it cancelled its Panim and the Achoraim became
Panim. After that it gave the remains of it, being the Aviut de Behina
Gimel de Zachar and Behina Bet de Nekeva to Kli de Hochma, and
then it is Matei in Hochma.

--- PAGE 87 ---
At that time Bina is suitable to remain there in Hochma as in the
beginning.
After the Panim returned to its place in the Hochma, the HB
immediately return to one degree. At that time Bina is in Kli de
Hochma.
However, it does not remain so here since Hochma turned her Panim
down and her Achoraim up. She returned the ZON de Bina to Kli de
Bina and they were divided into two Partzufim once more, and
examine it carefully.
First, when Kli de Hochma received her Orot ZON and the Panim of
Hochma returned to its place as in the beginning, it is certain that Bina
and Hochma joined and became one Kli. It is so for the same reason
mentioned above regarding the birth of Gadlut Hesed.
Here too when the Hesed is in Kli de Bina, joined with Kli de
Hochma, he receives He’arat Hochma as in the beginning. Thus you
find once more that Hesed has grown and does not need its Ima.
Yet, it is still impossible for it to descend from itself to its Kli, except
through the influence of Bina. Hence, Hochma had to return ZON de
Bina to Kli de Bina, as then Bina returns her Panim downward too and
returns the Ohr Hesed to its place, to its Kli.
But because of the Ohr Hesed in her place she comes down with
him.
In other words, had Bina remained connected to Kli de Hochma,
Hesed would have remained in her place and would not have
descended to his Kli de Hesed.
“Because He delighteth in mercy.”
This is the whole property of Bina; she craves Hassadim more than
the Ohr Hochma. This is the cause of the Hizdakchut of Aviut de
Behina Gimel de Zachar de Hochma to Behina Bet and afterwards the
Behina Bet de Bina to Behina Aleph, whose Ohr is Ohr Hassadim.
At that time she is Panim be Panim with the Kli de Hesed and then
gives the Ohr Hesed back to Kli de Hesed. It is written, “When Bina

--- PAGE 88 ---
descends in her place, Hesed does not need her and he descends to
his place.” This is so because after he had already received He’arat
Hochma from the time the Kli de Bina and Kli de Hochma were
connected, he no longer needs the sucking of the Kli de Bina, hence he
descends to his place.
Lo Matei in Gevura. At that time Kli of Gevura turns her Panim
downward.
The entire division of Gevura from Hesed was because of the two
distances, meaning because of the return of ZON de Keter to their
place when their Achoraim detained the Ohr Hochma from the Kli de
Hochma. At that time the He’arat Hochma stopped from Hesed, hence
he turned his Panim downward and gave Behinat VAK to the Gevura.
Thus, now that Hesed attained his GAR once more, it is natural that
Behinat Ohr Gevura that departed from the GAR returned to Kli de
Hesed once more as in the beginning before they separated.
See and understand that it is completely similar to the comportment of
the Kelim de Hochma and Bina. The division of the Orot de ZON de
Hochma and ZON de Bina was made because of the inversion of the
Achoraim de Kli de Hochma. This means that Hochma abandoned the
dispensing of her GAR and gave only VAK, which are Behinat ZON de
Kli de Bina.
Similarly, the Orot de Hesed and Gevura were divided by the
inversion of the Panim de Kli de Hesed. After the He’arat GAR was
deprived of him because of the two distances, he turned his Panim and
dispensed VAK without GAR, which is the Ohr of Gevura.
After it is Lo Matei in Keter and his force of Achor was cancelled and
he returned the Ohr Hochma to Kli de Hochma, the Panim of Hochma
returned to its place as in the beginning. Thus, the Orot de ZON de
Hochma and ZON de Bina reunited into a single Partzuf.
Similarly here, after the Hesed acquired He’arat Hochma when he
was in Kli de Bina at the time she was joined with Hochma, he
returned with the Gadlut to his place. At that time his Panim returned

--- PAGE 89 ---
as in the beginning, and thus the Orot of Hesed and Gevura unite into
one Ohr.
All this is because the Ohr is only divided into GAR and VAK because
some element compels it to. Consequently, as soon as that element is
cancelled they return to a single Ohr as in the beginning.
He writes, “Lo Matei in Gevura. At that time Kli of Gevura turns
her Panim downward and gives the five Orot below in Tifferet.
This is called Matei in Tifferet.” This is because when the Ohr
Gevura joins the Ohr Hesed into one, that connection operates on their
Kelim as well.
Since the Kli de Gevura joined with the Kli de Hesed, by that she
returned her Panim below, since she cancelled her Panim that detained
the dispensing of GAR and returned her Panim upwards. In other
words, she turned to dispense He’arat GAR like the Kli de Hesed.
At that time she dispensed her remains, ascribed to Tifferet, to the Kli
de Tifferet and Tifferet receives He’arat GAR as well. This is the
meaning of Tifferet being called Vav ו with a Rosh. It is the same
He’arat GAR that it receives through the dispensing of the Ohr
Gevura when Gevura is connected into one with the Ohr Hesed.
Now you can understand what is brought in several places that Tifferet
is merged of Hesed and Gevura together. It means that it receives the
remains of the Ohr Gevura from the time it is connected into one with
the Ohr Hesed.
Now we understand Sefirat Tifferet de ZA from its origin. Its Kli is
Behinat Bina de VAK because the HGT are the KHB of the VAK.
However, it is regarded as merely Behinat Sefirat Daat de VAK.
This is so because of its Ohr, which is Behinat Daat. However, first
we must know what is the Ohr Daat. After all we only have ten Sefirot
KHB HGT NHYM. It is known that it is written in Sefer Yetzira (Book
of Creation), “Ten and not eleven.” Thus, what is that Ohr Daat?
Know, that the source of that Ohr is the interchanging of the Orot here
in Hitpashtut Bet. Here Ohr Hochma comes to Kli de Keter, Ohr Bina

--- PAGE 90 ---
to Kli de Hochma, Ohr Hesed to Kli de Bina and Malchut to Kli de
ZA, as we learn from the Rav’s words.
Note, that this Ohr Hesed that comes to Kli de Bina is the origin of the
Ohr Daat, hence the Rav calls it “Bina’s son”. Its Behinat AVI are the
Zachar and Nekeva in Kli de Bina. The Zachar is Behinat Hochma de
Kli de Bina and the Nekeva is Behinat Bina de Kli de Bina. Ohr Hesed
is the Behinat Daat between this HB, which is always called “the son
of HB”.
More precisely, the ZON de Kli de Hochma are both considered
Behinat Hochma and Behinat Abba, and the ZON in Kli de Bina are
both considered Behinat Bina and Behinat Ima. The Ohr Hesed in Kli
de Bina is considered Behinat Daat and Behinat son of these AVI.
This clarifies that the Ohr Hesed was originally emanated from the
remains of the Ohr of ZON de Hochma after they purified into Behina
Aleph. It came to Kli de Bina, which is discerned as its Ima, and
lingered there in the intestine of the Kli de Bina until it acquired
He’arat Hochma, meaning until it grew. At that time it came out to the
place of the Kelim de VAK, called “Avir ha Olam”, and there is
nothing more to add here.
Now we have explained the Ohr Daat from its Shoresh, that it is a son
and a progeny that was renewed because of the interchanging of the
Orot in Hitpashtut Bet. For that reason it comes and clothes Kli de
Bina though it is only Ohr ZA and Behinat VAK, having no
equivalence with Behinat GAR.
This is so because the difference between GAR and VAK is so far, as
between an Ohr and its Kli. Yet, because of the interchanging of the
Orot this Ohr de VAK came and clothed the Kli de GAR. This is a very
wonderful matter. Examine this for there is no need to elaborate here
in what is not necessary for our issue.
From all that has been explained thus far you can see that these three
Sefirot HGT de ZA are not considered that essence of ZA, but Behinat
GAR KHB or HBD de ZA. It has been written above that the five
Ktzavot HGT NH are the very five Behinot KHB, ZA and Malchut. Yet,

--- PAGE 91 ---
when they are Behinat Ohr Hassadim and Ohr VAK, their names
change to HGT NH.
Thus, the actual Behinat ZA begins at the fourth end of the five
Hassadim Netzah since it is opposite the fourth Behina, called ZA. The
Tifferet, however, is opposite the third Behina, called Bina, and
remember that.
Therefore, Orot de HGT are also Behinat GAR, but begin from
Hochma for the above reason. The Ohr Hesed is considered Ohr
Hochma of the VAK, Ohr Tifferet is considered that same Ohr Hesed
from the point of its clothing in Kli de Bina, meaning Behinat Ohr
Daat and the son of HB.
This is the actual Behinat Ohr VAK. The Orot de Hesed and Gevura,
however, are considered Behinat He’arot Hochma and Bina that
reached that Ohr Hesed though they are not the Atzmut Ohr Hesed in
its own essence.
The reason for it is the attitude of the Kelim. Hesed and Gevura are
originally in Behinat Kelim de Keter and Hochma. Since this Ohr
Hesed never clothed in these Kelim, it also does not clothe the Kelim
de Hesed and Gevura.
However, since it clothed the Kli de Bina, it takes its place in the
Kelim de VAK in the Kli Tifferet in the place of Bina. Hence, the
Tifferet is considered the gist of the Partzuf de ZA, the Guf de Ilana.
The above Atzmut Ohr Hesed inside it is considered the Shokaim de
Ilana (shins of the tree), and all the other Sefirot of the ZAT are
considered the Anafim that hang in the Tifferet.
42. After that it is Matei in Keter once more and then Lo Matei in
Hochma and Bina since the two rise to Keter together. In that state
it is Lo Matei in Hesed, as he rises to the place of Bina, as in the
beginning because of the two distances between them.
At that time it is Matei in Gevura and then it is Lo Matei in
Tifferet, as the Ohr Tifferet ascends in Gevura because of the

--- PAGE 92 ---
yearning. At that time the Kli Tifferet turns his Panim and gives
the four Orot in Netzah, and this is called Matei in Netzah.
Ohr Pnimi
42. It is Matei in Keter once more and then Lo Matei in Hochma and
Bina etc.
You already know that the coming of Hesed to its Kli makes it Matei
in Keter (see Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “You find”). This is so because
there is no giving of Orot except Panim be Panim, as the Rav says
above.
Hence, Bina must purify from Behina Bet to Behina Aleph and then
the Orot de HB depart to the Keter and induce a Zivug Elyon there on
Aviut de Behina Gimel. At that time the Ohr Matei in Komat Hochma
as in the beginning.
Then Lo Matei in HB because the Achoraim de Kli de Keter stop and
detain the He’arat GAR. Because of that Lo Matei in Hesed too since
there are two vacant distances without Ohr, which are HB.
Since the Ohr is Lo Matei in Hochma you find that even the He’arat
Hochma in Hesed stops from it and Hesed returns to its Katnut. In that
state it needs its Ima Bina once more to suck He’arat GAR from her.
Thus, Hesed ascends to the Bina and his Kli turns its Panim
downward and the Ohr de Gevura descends to the Kli de Gevura and
is Matei in Gevura. At that time it is Lo Matei in Tifferet since the
Achoraim de Gevura stop and detain the He’arat GAR of the Ohr
Tifferet.
For that reason the Ohr Tifferet rises to Kli de Gevura, as it did not
descend from the Gevura except by the force of the He’arat GAR of
the dominion of Hesed over Gevura. Now that the dominion of
Gevura has come once more, the Gevura raises his Ohr to her once
more, as in the beginning.
At that time Kli de Tifferet turns its Panim downward for it must
revoke the influence of its GAR, which was its previous Panim, and

--- PAGE 93 ---
make its Achor the Panim of bestowal. After that it lowers the remains
of the Ohr in it to Netzah and this is called Matei in Netzah.
Now we shall understand Sefirat Netzah de ZA thoroughly. The Kli de
Netzah is the Behinat ZA itself since the Hesed of the five Hassadim
corresponds to Behina Gimel of the Keter and the Dalet Behinot de
Ohr Yashar. It is so because the HGT are considered KHB de
Hassadim and Netzah and Hod are Behinot ZA and Malchut de
Hassadim.
You find that from the perspective of the Ohr Sefirat Tifferet is the gist
of the Ohr ZA. The Etzem Ohr Daat clothes the Kli de Tifferet and this
is because of the interchanging of the Orot. Since Ohr Hochma
clothed in Keter and Ohr Bina in Kli de Hochma, you find that Ohr
ZA clothes in Kli de Tifferet, which is Behinat Bina of the five
Hassadim.
However, from the perspective of the Kelim, the Netzah is considered
the Atzmut of ZA and the Ohr of Netzah is the Behinat VAK that
remains in Kli de Tifferet after its Histalkut from there to Gevura. The
difference between it and Sefirat Gevura is that the Ohr of the Gevura
is evaluated as VAK de Hochma although it is also discerned as VAK.
This is so because it is the remains of Hesed from the Behinat He’arat
Hochma in it, and is evaluated like the Ohr ZON de Kli de Bina.
However, the Ohr Netzah is Behinat VAK de Ohr ZA since we learned
there that the Ohr of Tifferet is actually Behinat Ohr ZA.
We must predominantly discern here that how the Orot and the Kelim
de HGT here relate to the Orot and Kelim de NHYM is the same as
how the GAR relates to VAK. This is because the HGT correlate to
GAR de Hey Behinot and NHYM correlate to ZA and Malchut de Hey
Behinot.
43. After that it returns to being Lo Matei in Keter and then it is Matei
in Hochma. It is also Matei in Bina because of the Hesed there
“because He delighteth in mercy.”

--- PAGE 94 ---
At that time it is also Matei in Hesed for then Hesed descends to
his place, and it is then Lo Matei in Gevura because Gevura
ascends with the Hesed. At that time it is Matei in Tifferet and Ohr
descends in Tifferet.
Then it is Lo Matei in Netzah since the Ohr Netzah ascends with
the Tifferet. At that time it is Matei in Hod since then the Kli of
Netzah turns his Panim and gives the three Orot to Hod, at which
time the Hod turns his Panim to Yesod and shines in him.
Ohr Pnimi
43. Lo Matei in Keter and then it is Matei in Hochma.
This is because the Zachar and Nekeva de Ohr Keter purified to
Behina Bet. Then their Achoraim was cancelled and they dispensed
the Ohr Bina to the Kli of Hochma, they are Matei in Hochma and the
Panim de Hochma returned to its place as in the beginning.
It is also Matei in Bina because of the Hesed there.
This means that Hochma turned her Panim downward, gave the
Zachar and Nekeva of Bina to Kli de Bina and is Matei in Bina too.
He explains the reason: “because of the Hesed there” so that he may
correct the Hesed and lower it to his Kli (see Ohr Pnimi item 41).
Matei in Hesed for then Hesed descends to his place.
Through the Hizdakchut Behina Bet in Bina to Behina Aleph. This is
Behinat Ohr of the five Hassadim that belong to the VAK. At that time
the Ohr Hesed descends to its Kli, is Matei in the Hesed and its Panim
return to its place.
Lo Matei in Gevura because Gevura ascends with the Hesed.
The whole Ohr Gevura is discerned as the Achoraim and the VAK of
the Ohr Hesed. Since the Panim of Hesed returned to its place the
Achoraim that was in Gevura was cancelled and incorporated once
more in the Panim de Ohr Hesed. In that state the Kli de Gevura
returns and turns its Panim downward, giving the Ohr Tifferet in
He’arat GAR to the Tifferet (see Ohr Pnimi item 41).

--- PAGE 95 ---
Lo Matei in Netzah since the Ohr Netzah ascends with the Tifferet.
This too is for the above reason that Ohr Netzah is only Behinat
Achoraim and VAK of the Ohr Tifferet. Thus, when the Panim of
Tifferet returned to its place it pulls its VAK to it as Hesed pulled the
Ohr Gevura and as Hochma that pulled ZON de Bina to herself.
Matei in Hod since then the Kli of Netzah turns his Panim.
After the Ohr de Netzah rose to the Panim of the Kli de Tifferet it thus
turns the Panim of its Kli to its Achoraim. This is because the previous
dispensing of GAR is detained in it in Behinat Achor. Now it has
become the place of bestowal as the Panim de Kli of the Hesed that
now controls it. At that time it gives its remains to the Hod in
dispensing of GAR.
Now we have found the way to understand the Sefira of Hod of the ZA
from its origin. Know, that this Sefira is the axis that all the
corrections depend on and revolve around.
Its Kli is the last fifth Behina of the five Behinot KHB ZA and
Malchut, meaning the original Kli Malchut. This is because the four
previous Hassadim correspond to KHB ZA, and Hesed is fifth,
meaning the Hod which is opposite Malchut.
You already know that all those Kelim de Hitpashtut Bet are the Kelim
of Hitpashtut Aleph that have been emptied of their Orot. It turns out
that the Kli de Hod is the Behina Dalet de Hitpashtut Aleph that has
been emptied of her Ohr and did not leave any Reshimo after her (see
the Rav’s words Part 4, Chap 2 item 6).
However, the Ohr of the Hod is not the Ohr Malchut, but the Ohr ZA,
meaning what reached her from the remains of Netzah when he was
connected with the Ohr de He’arat GAR of the Tifferet. Moreover, it is
the most important Ohr among the Sefirot of NHYM. From the
perspective of the Orot it is Behinat GAR of ZA, not ZA himself.
Thus, he is more important than Netzah, as Netzah is from the Behinat
Achoraim and VAK of the Ohr Tifferet, but the Hod is called the “fifth
Hesed” since he is Behinat He’arat GAR that is in NHYM. Though it

--- PAGE 96 ---
is Behina Dalet from the perspective of the Kli, being the greater Din
in the Eser Sefirot, its gist is of course the Ohr in it. This Ohr is now
very sweetened, meaning from He’arat GAR in Tifferet, and examine
carefully.
Hod turns his Panim to Yesod and shines in him.
You already know that all this Ohr that extends in Matei ve Lo Matei
from Bina to Hod is Ohr de Hassadim. In other words, it is the
Behinat Koma that emerged on the Aviut de Behina Aleph that
remained after the Hizdakchut of Bina.
The matter of the difference of Matei ve Lo Matei is primarily through
the changes of He’arat GAR in Hassadim or Hassadim without
He’arat GAR. However, there was no difference between them in the
stature of the Koma since they are all at the level of Behina Aleph.
Here Sefirat Hod turned its Panim backward though it had not
completed the Hizdakchut de Behina Aleph, only cancelled the
Behinat He’arat GAR in it, which is the Panim and turned the Achor
into Behinat Panim. However, here we must know what the Rav has
written that the ZON in Kli de Bina mated and procreated one Hey.
The Vav ו inside the Hey ה was given to Kli de Yesod and the Dalet ד
on the Vav was given to the Kli de Malchut.
Interpretation: Bina turned her Panim for the first time and purified
from her Aviut de Behina Bet into Behina Aleph that equalized her
Panim to the Panim de Kli de Hesed. At that time she also lowered
one Ohr that was born by the Zivug of the Zachar and Nekeva in
herself.
This Ohr is Behinat Nukva and is therefore called Hey. Thus, Behinat
Zachar and Nekeva descended to the Kelim de VAK too, as they
descended to the GAR de Hitpashtut Bet.
The Zachar is the above Ohr Daat and the Nekeva is that Ohr born by
the Zivug of ZON de Bina, called Hey. All these Orot that come and
are born through a Zivug, the Rav names He’arot (see item 35).

--- PAGE 97 ---
He says there that Hochma turned her Panim and shines for Bina. He
also says that the Hod turned his Panim to the Yesod and shines in
him. Also, he says below that so it was in all the VAK, which turn their
Panim and shine below. All these are Hamshachot (pl. for
Hamshacha) of the Orot that come by the Zivug, for which he names
them He’arot.
It is written, “Hod turns his Panim to Yesod and shines in him.” It
means that there was not a complete Hizdakchut, only what is
sufficient to illuminate the Hey of Bina to the Yesod. Afterwards, when
there was a complete Hizdakchut, the Ohr that belongs to Yesod
descended to Yesod.
Yet, this Hey that was born from ZON de Bina is the beginning of the
association of Midat ha Rachamim in Din, hence it is worthwhile to
expand the understanding of it. We have already discussed this Hidush
that was made in Hitpashtut Bet when the Ohr ZA was emanated and
elicited through the Hochma and not through Bina as it would be in
the Eser Sefirot de Ohr Yashar and as it was in Hitpashtut Aleph.
This Hidush came here by the inversion of the Orot. Besides that there
is yet another great Hidush here: Ohr Malchut was emanated by the
Bina and not by the ZA, as in Eser Sefirot de Ohr Yashar and as it was
in Hitpashtut Aleph.
The Ohr Daat was emanated from the Hizdakchut of the Zachar and
Nekeva of Kli de Hochma, which is the Ohr Zeir Anpin. Similarly, Ohr
Malchut emerged by the Hizdakchut of the Zachar and Nekeva de Kli
de Bina, namely the Hey, which belongs to Malchut, as she is Ohr
Nekeva.
Now you will thoroughly understand the difference between Ohr
Daat, which is Ohr ZA, and the Ohr of the above Hey, which is the
Ohr Malchut, meaning according to their emanation. In fact, when
they were emanated, both came out in Behinat Koma of Behina Aleph.
This is so because Behina Bet de ZON of the Kli de Hochma purified
to Behina Aleph, which is Ohr Hesed, (see item 37), called Ohr Daat
or Ohr ZA. Similarly, the Behina Bet of the Zachar and Nekeva de

--- PAGE 98 ---
Bina purified into Behina Bet, which is the above Ohr Hey, being the
Ohr Malchut.
Therefore, you find that the Ohr Hesed, which is the Ohr ZA, and the
Ohr of the Hey, which is the Ohr Malchut, are of equal Koma. This is
so because both are Behina Aleph, as both came from the Hizdakchut
of Behina Bet.
Yet, the difference between them is as great as the measure of the
difference between ZON de Hochma and ZON de Bina. It has been
clarified above that ZON de Bina are considered the Achoraim and
Behinat VAK of the ZON de Hochma.
It is therefore obvious that the consequences that stem from them are
also as far as GAR is far from VAK. The Ohr Hesed that was emanated
by the ZON de Hochma is considered the Behinat Panim and GAR
compared to the Ohr Hey, which is considered the Achoraim and VAK
compared to the Ohr Hesed, being the Ohr ZA. It is analogous to the
ratio in the progenitors, and examine well.
Now we can thoroughly understand what the Rav stresses above (item
38), “However, Bina did not turn her Panim to shine in Hesed
below since there was no power in Hesed and VAK to receive such
a great Ohr Panim be Panim, only Achor be Achor.”
In that he refers to the above Ohr Hey, which he names He’arah since
it came out through a Zivug and in the regular order of Hizdakchut and
emanation of the Orot from one another.
He stresses in that regard that the Ohr of this Hey did not come to the
VAK before the seven Orot that come in the regular order of the
Hizdakchut. It is similar to the Zachar of Bina, born out of the Zivug
ZON de Hochma, which comes to Kli de Bina before the Ohr Hesed
comes through the ordinary Hizdakchut, as the Rav has written before
(item 35).
The reason is that if the Ohr of the Hey had come before the
Hizdakchut to Behina Aleph, meaning before the time of the descent
of Hesed, like the Zachar of Bina, it would have been the Koma of the

--- PAGE 99 ---
Hey that was in Behina Bet. This is so because the Aviut de Bina had
not yet purified to Behina Aleph, but only when Hesed was given to
the Kli de Hesed.
This is what the Rav stresses, “since there was no power in Hesed
and VAK to receive such a great Ohr.” How is it possible that the
Ohr Koma of Behina Bet would come and clothe the Kelim de VAK,
which are Behina Aleph?
Thus, first Bina was compelled to purify from Behina Bet to Behina
Aleph, at which time the Ohr Hey purified to the measure of Behina
Aleph. Then both of them came out, meaning the Ohr Hesed and the
Ohr Hey, and came to Kli de Hesed. This Hey then moved from Kli to
Kli until it came to the Kli of Yesod which is its place.
Now you can also see what the Rav answers there and says that the
Hochma could have illuminated to the Bina before it purified to
Behina Aleph, before Abba ve Ima remain as one and come out as one.
He wishes to say that Hochma emanated and gave the Zachar de Bina
to the Kli of Bina before she was purified to Behina Aleph.
This is because the Kli of Bina is indeed a Kli de Behina Bet like the
Koma of the Ohr Hochma, hence it does not need to purify and lessen
its Koma to Behina Aleph. This is not so with Bina to the Kelim de
Hesed and the rest of the VAK, which are Kelim of Behina Aleph, as
how can they receive the Ohr of the Hey while it has Koma de Behina
Bet?
It is written, “at which time the Hod turns his Panim to Yesod and
shines in him.” It has been explained that this Hey is considered the
Ohr Achoraim and VAK.
Thus, since the Panim of the Hod is from Behinat He’arat GAR, it
therefore cannot dispense the Ohr of the Hey, which is Behinat Ohr
Achoraim, unless through turning the Panim downward and the
Achoraim upward. In other words, her Achor, which dispenses VAK
and prevents GAR will not become the giver, and will then give the
above Ohr Hey to Yesod.

--- PAGE 100 ---
44. It is the same matter in all the VAK since when the Orot are given
in them they turn their Panim and shine below. This is because it
is precisely Bina who did not turn her Panim to Hesed since there
is no power in Hesed to receive the Ohr Bina. The VAK, however,
have the ability in themselves to receive Ohr from one another
since all the VAK are equal.
Ohr Pnimi
44. It is the same matter in all the VAK since when the Orot are given
in them they turn their Panim and shine below.
As it has been written above, this Hey emerged by the Zivug from the
Zachar and Nekeva de Kli de Bina, when Bina purified from Behina
Bet to Behina Aleph, to give the Ohr Hesed in Kli de Hesed. At that
time the Ohr of this Hey emerged with it too, Hesed gave to Gevura
etc. until she reached Kli de Hod and Hod gave to Yesod.
It is written, “It is the same matter in all the VAK since when the
Orot are given in them they turn their Panim and shine below.” In
other words, that same Ohr of the Hey that came out by a Zivug,
whose dispensing is always referred to by the Rav as He’arah.
45. After that it returned to being Matei in Keter and then Lo Matei in
Hochma and Bina since they both rise there. It is also Lo Matei in
Hesed because it rose to Bina and it is Matei in Gevura.
At that time it is Lo Matei in Tifferet and then it is Matei in Netzah
and Lo Matei in Hod. In that state the Hod turns its Panim and
gives the two Orot to Yesod, then it is Matei in Yesod. Then the
Yesod turns its Panim and shines to Malchut, etc. in all the VAK.
Ohr Pnimi
45. Returned to being Matei in Keter etc. and Lo Matei in Hod.
It has already been repeatedly explained above that the dispensing of
Bina to the Kli de VAK causes Matei in Keter. In that state the Achor
of Kli de Keter dominate, preventing any He’arat GAR in the Partzuf,
even in the Kli de Hochma, much less in the Kelim below that receive

--- PAGE 101 ---
from the Kli of Hochma. Hence, the He’arat GAR departs from the Kli
de Hod and the Kli turns its Panim down, giving the rest to Yesod.
However, regarding their turning of the Panim of the Kli de Hod, there
is also a matter of the Hizdakchut of the Aviut de Behina Aleph to
Behinat Keter. The Ohr that comes out has but Komat Malchut, as the
Rav has written above that Komat Malchut clothed the Kli de Yesod.
In this manner, there were two Behinot regarding the turning of the
Panim de Hod, both the matter of the administering of the Achoraim
instead of the Panim as before, and the matter of the Hizdakchut of the
Aviut de Behina Aleph. The latter dominated all five Ktzavot, Hesed
through Hod, and now Hod has purified from its Behina Aleph and
gave only Komat Malchut to the Kli de Yesod. The reason for it is that
there is no more than five Ktzavot in the Koma de Behina Aleph.
Now Sefirat Yesod de ZA has been clarified for us. Its Kli is from
Behinat Malchut since the Kli de Hod of the ZA is also a Kli of
Malchut, and all the more so the Kli that follows it.
Thus, all of these three Kelim Hod, Yesod and Malchut are a mere
Hitpashtut of Kli Malchut. They expand primarily because of that
above-mentioned Hey that descended from the Zivug ZON de Bina,
but also because of the Ohr Achoraim that remained from the Kli de
Hod after it turned her Panim because of the dominion of the Achor de
Keter. It is so because these two Orot are specific to the Kli de Yesod.
Thus, the Kli de Yesod is discerned as Kli Malchut and the Ohr in it is
combined of Din and Rachamim. This is because the Ohr of the
Achoraim that remains of Sefirat Hod after she had turned her Panim
is discerned as the hardest Din in all five Ktzavot de ZA.
This is so because it is the Kli de Behina Dalet from the time of
Hitpashtut Aleph. However, when He’arat GAR of Tifferet it was to
the contrary, considered Hesed reached it.
This is so because the He’arat GAR turns everything to Hesed. Yet,
when the He’arat GAR is absent, only the Midat Din remains in it, and
that Midat Din came down to the Kli of Yesod.

--- PAGE 102 ---
You must know that that was a Hidush in the Partzuf. Until now none
of Midat ha Din appeared in the Partzuf in all five Ktzavot. On the
contrary, the Ohr de Hassadim of the Koma de Behina Aleph
dominated the entire Partzuf though once in He’arat GAR and once
without He’arat GAR.
Now, however, Komat Ohr Hassadim has already purified from
Sefirat Hod and there is only Komat Malchut there. Since the He’arat
GAR disappeared from the Partzuf, there appeared the entire Din force
in Kli de Hod and that residue descended to Kli de Yesod. Thus you
find that this Din force is a Hidush that has now appeared in the Kli de
Yesod.
Thus, now all five Ktzavot are considered Behinat Hey Gevurot
because of the Hidush Tzura that they have acquired in the Kli de
Yesod. Hence, now there are two Behinot: Hey Hassadim in the Hey
Ktzavot from Hesed to Hod, and the second is since they are five
Gevurot, meaning in the Kli de Yesod.
However, there is yet another Ohr of the Hey in the Kli de Yesod,
meaning what reached it from the Zivug ZON de Bina. It is a very big
Ohr since from the Shoresh of its emanation, it is Behina Bet, since it
comes from the Zivug de ZON of Behina Bet.
Afterwards, when it descended along with the Ohr Hesed to the Kelim
de VAK, it was lessened to Komat Malchut once more. However, since
it is from Zivug de Behina Bet, it is considered Ohr Hesed, but on a
low Koma.
Thus, from her perspective the Hey Ktzavot are regarded as Hey
Hassadim once more, sweetening the above Hey Gevurot that
descended to the Kli de Yesod from the residue of the Ohr Hod. Thus
we have thoroughly learned that the Ohr Yesod is a combined Ohr of
Hesed and Din, called Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot.
The Hey Gevurot are from the remains of the Ohr VAK, and the Hey
Hassadim are from the residue of the Zachar and the Nekeva de Kli de
Bina. They mix and join together in the Kli of Yesod. Bear in mind that

--- PAGE 103 ---
all this is done here during, and because of the dominion of the Achor
de Kli de Keter.
46. Afterwards it returned to being Lo Matei in Keter and then it is
Matei in HB and Hesed and then it is Lo Matei in Gevura, Matei in
Tifferet and Lo Matei in Netzah, Matei in Hod and Lo Matei in
Yesod, as it ascended in Hod.
At that time it turns its Panim and gives Ohr to Malchut below in
her place, and then it is Matei in Malchut. Now the first Behinot
are complete, which is the reality of the Hitpashtut. Thus, all ten
Orot reached the Malchut.
Ohr Pnimi
46. Lo Matei in Keter etc. Matei in Hod and Lo Matei in Yesod, as it
ascended in Hod. At that time it turns its Panim and gives Ohr to
Malchut below in her place, and then it is Matei in Malchut.
The matter of Lo Matei in Keter has already been explained, being
because of the regular Hizdakchut through the Bitush de Ohr Makif
and Ohr Pnimi, at which time the Behina Gimel in the Kli purified into
Behina Bet. The Ohr that elicits in that Zivug is Komat Bina and that
remains gave the Keter to the Kli de Hochma.
Since the He’arat GAR returned to the Partzuf, all the Behinot Panim
and Hochma, Bina, and Hesed, Tifferet and Hod, returned to their
original place. Then the Ohr Yesod rises and joins the He’arat Panim
de GAR of the Hod for the above reason.
At that time the Kli de Yesod turns its Panim downward, meaning it
administers Behinat He’arat GAR, relating to the dominion of the Kli
de Hod on it. However, it is not from Behina Aleph but only from
Komat Ohr Malchut, as the Ohr that remains in the Kli de Yesod is
only Komat Malchut, and then it is Matei in Malchut.
However, here we must know what is the Ohr of Yesod that rose to
Hod and what is its residue, which it gave to the Kli de Malchut. We
thoroughly know the origin of the above Hey that descended to Kli de
Yesod.

--- PAGE 104 ---
You already know that this Hey is a result of the Zivug ZON in Kli de
Bina. We must also discern a shape of Dalet ד over Vav ו in this Hey
ה.
This Vav in the Pnimiut of the Partzuf has no Rosh and there is a
significant indication here since this Hey consists of the Zachar and
Nekeva in Bina. Hence, the Behinat Nekeva in the Hey is the Dalet
and the Behinat Zachar in the Hey is the Vav without the Rosh inside
it.
The meaning of the words is that the matter of the cessation of the left
leg in the Hey implies the cessation of the GAR from the VAK that had
been prepared and made inside the Kli de Bina. There is a great
Hidush to discern: the Nekeva is more important than her Zachar since
the Zachar is resultant from the Zivug Zachar and Nekeva de Kli de
Hochma when the Zachar is in Behinat Harkanat Rosh (see the Rav’s
words item 35).
The Hochma turned her Panim and shines to Bina Panim be Panim,
only He’arah. It means that the Zachar in Kli de Hochma, which is
Behina Gimel, turned its Panim and purified into Behina Bet like the
Nukva of Kli de Hochma.
You find that the Zachar lowered its Rosh since the GAR de Hochma
is called Rosh. Now, after it departed from the Aviut de Behina Gimel,
the entire Ohr Hochma disappeared from it, and it equalizes with
Komat Bina of its Nekeva. At that time they mated and procreated the
above Zachar of Kli de Bina.
It is known that any offspring and resultant is considered VAK of its
Maatzil, meaning the Zachar and Nekeva de Hochma that gave birth
to it. When they procreated it they both had only Komat Bina, hence
their offspring is merely VAK of that Koma.
However, the Nekeva of the Kli de Bina is discerned as the Reshimo of
Bina that remained in that Kli from the time of Hitpashtut Aleph that
the Ohr Bina of Hitpashtut Aleph left there when departing from there.
That Ohr Bina had Komat Keter there since all Eser Sefirot de
Hitpashtut Aleph had Komat Keter.

--- PAGE 105 ---
Thus, you see the great importance of this Reshimo that remained in
Kli de Bina. However, it became a Nukva to the Zachar de Keter de
Kli de Bina, which lacks even the GAR de Bina.
That was so because this Reshimo has a very small Ohr, as all her Ohr
has already departed. She is but a Reshimo, meaning a very small Ohr
that must remain after every Ohr when it leaves its place. Hence, since
the Reshimo has no Ohr, she became a Behinat Nekeva to the above
Ohr Zachar, which is much lower than her, so as to receive Ohr from
it, and examine that.
Now you will thoroughly understand the meaning of this above Hey
that was emanated from those Zachar and Nekeva. The truncated Vav
without the Rosh that stands inside that Hey is the Behinat Zachar in
that resultant. This is because it is Behinat VAK de Komat Bina
without the Behinat Rosh de Komat Bina.
The Dalet that surrounds that truncated Vav in the Hey is the Behinat
Nekeva in this resultant. It is regarded as the Rosh over the truncated
Vav since it is completely Behinat GAR.
Yet, it lacks the Ohr, which the truncated Vav has, whose entire Ohr is
only what she receives from that truncated Vav. Hence, it is called
Dalet, indicating that she is poor and devoid of Shefa from her own
Behina and must receive from her Zachar.
That cessation that was made in the left leg of the Hey indicates that
she divided into two separate degrees from one another. This is what
has now been made by the ascent of the Ohr Yesod to Sefirat Hod.
You know the two kinds of Orot in the Kli de Yesod. The first is the
Behinat Dinim that remained in the Hod after the He’arat GAR
disappeared there, and the second is the Ohr of the Hey that was
drawn to it from the ZON in Bina.
After the Ohr Matei in Hod, being Behinat He’arat GAR that departed
from the Ohr of Yesod when that Ohr is in Hod, it causes its residue to
descend to Yesod. Now you find that when the Ohr descended to the
Hod once more, the residue that descended to Yesod has certainly

--- PAGE 106 ---
returned to its Shoresh, to Hod since now it has He’arat GAR there
once more.
That Ohr that rose there took the Behinat truncated Vav inside the Hey
in the Yesod along with it and raised it to the Hod. Thus, two Orot rose
from the Yesod. The first is the Ohr above Malchut, meaning the
residue that it took from Hod first. The second is the truncated Vav
inside the Hey.
The reason for it is that although that Vav is not at all from Behinat
Hod, it still rose there. This is so because it was first connected to the
Ohr of Malchut in order to sweeten it.
The Ohr Malchut is discerned as the Hey Gevurot and the Hey is the
Behinat Hey Hassadim, and they were sweetened in one another. That
sweetening comes only from the Vav inside the Hey since it is the
entire Ohr inside the Hey though it certainly took the He’arat GAR in
her from the Dalet, meaning only during the Lo Matei in Hod, and it
was in the Yesod without He’arat GAR.
Now, however, that it is Matei He’arat GAR in Hod once more, it no
longer needs the He’arat GAR in the Behina of the Dalet. Therefore, it
only took the Behinat Vav when it rose up there, not the Behinat Dalet
that surrounds it. You should also know that that Behina of Dalet ד
that surrounds it came down and clothed the Kli Malchut.
Now we can thoroughly understand Sefirat Malchut. This is because
the Kli in her is Kli Malchut, extending from Kli de Hod and the Ohr
in her is the Behinat Dalet ד that surrounds the Vav from the Behinat
Hey that extends from ZON de Bina.
However, the Ohr of Malchut herself is what clothed here in the Kli of
Yesod. For that reason Malchut is called Aspaklaria that does not
shine, as the Rav says above (Part 4).
You find that there are four males and four females in this Hitpashtut
Bet. The first two couples are ZON de Keter and ZON de Hochma.
The males in them are more important than the females since the

--- PAGE 107 ---
Zachar de Keter is from Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut but the Nekeva de
Keter is only from Behina Gimel.
The Zachar de Kli de Hochma is from Behina Gimel, but the Nekeva
de Kli de Hochma is from Behina Bet. Thus, the males are greater than
the females.
However, in both, the males and females are found in one Kli. They
are close since the males are from the Reshimot that remained after the
Histalkut of Hitpashtut Aleph, hence they are devoid of Ohr. The
females, however, are from the new, second Hitpashtut and are filled
with Ohr.
However, in the Zachar and Nekeva de Kli de Bina, the Nekeva is
greater than the Zachar. This is because the Zachar is Behinat VAK de
Bina, hence they are both in one Kli, as the Nekeva is from the
Reshimo and lacks Ohr and the Zachar comes from the Zivug of ZON
de Hochma, hence it is filled with Ohr.
Also, though the Zachar in Kli de Keter is a Reshimo, considered
devoid of Ohr, that absence concerns only its GAR. From the
perspective of VAK, however, it is filled with Ohr.
Yet, there are many discernments in the Zachar and Nekeva of the
VAK. The Zachar, being the Ohr ZA, is emanated by the Hochma,
which is the Ohr Hesed in the Kli de Bina and then expands to the Kli
de ZA. The Nekeva, however, is a upshot of Bina, meaning the Hey
that was emanated by the ZON of Bina.
We must still discern another Behinat Zachar and Nekeva there,
namely the Zachar and Nekeva in Yesod and Malchut. There the
Zachar is smaller than the Nekeva since the Zachar is the Behinat Vav
without the Rosh inside the Hey that extends from the Zachar of Bina,
which is Behinat VAK. Nevertheless, they are not in one Kli but the
Zachar is in the upper Kli, which is the Yesod, and the Nekeva is in the
lower Kli, being Malchut.
These two above Behinot ZON inside the seven lower Sefirot are
sometimes considered one, and sometimes two. This is because in

--- PAGE 108 ---
Gadlut, the Nekeva has all the above Hey and all the VAK are then
considered the Zachar of that Hey.
However, in Katnut only the Yesod is considered Behinat Zachar and
then Malchut has only the Dalet ד in the Hey ה, as the truncated Vav
takes the Yesod. There are many changes in that too and this is not the
place to elaborate.
We must also note here that there are three divisions in the lower
seven, which are Behinat Rosh, Toch, Sof. The first are Hesed and
Gevura, which are Behinat Rosh of the VAK. The second are Tifferet
and Netzah, which are the Behinat Toch of the VAK. The third are
Hod, Yesod, Malchut. These are the Behinat Sof of the VAK.
The matter of Matei ve Lo Matei depends only on Keter and Hochma.
This is so because the Achor de Keter denies He’arat GAR from the
entire Partzuf, except when Keter’s dominion is cancelled, meaning by
the Hizdakchut of the Aviut in the Masach in it, which belongs to its
Koma. At that time the Ohr departs from Keter and its residue is Matei
in Hochma from which appears He’arat GAR in the Partzuf.
Hence, if Matei in Keter, He’arat GAR is denied even from the
Hochma. Therefore, at that time the Behinat VAK of the seven lower
Sefirot control, namely the VAK de Rosh in them, which is Sefirat
Gevura.
If Lo Matei in Keter, at which time Matei in Hochma, then comes the
dominion of the He’arat GAR in the RTS of the seven lower Sefirot,
meaning their Behinat He’arat GAR de Rosh, which is Hesed. Also,
their Behinat He’arat GAR of their interior, which is the Tifferet, their
Behinat He’arat GAR de Sof, which is Hod, from which comes the
Behinat GAR without the VAK to the Malchut, called Dalet ד over the
Vav ו in the form of the Ot Hey ה.
This Dalet ד means cessation of Ohr from the Partzuf. Because all the
Aviut in the Masach purified and the Zivug stopped, there is no Ohr
Hozer to clothe the Ohr Yashar there any longer, and the Ohr Yashar
stops too. All the Sefirot return to the Maatzil through Hitkalelut of all

--- PAGE 109 ---
the Reshimot in them within the Masach, as the Masach ascends to the
Maatzil.
Now the first Behinot are complete, which is the reality of the
Hitpashtut.
This refers to Hitpashtut Bet, called Partzuf AB de AK.
Thus, all ten Orot reached the Malchut.
It means that the Hizdakchut reached Komat Malchut. At that time the
Masach is clean from any Aviut from the Behinat Guf until its Tzura is
equal to the Behinat Masach of Malchut of the Rosh. It is considered
to have risen there and become incorporated in the Zivug de Lo Pasik
in the Malchut of Rosh.
In that state the Reshimot of the Sefirot Guf contained in it in the full
measure of their Aviut reawaken, and it thickens once more in the
Aviut from the Behinat Guf. Thus its Tzura has been differentiated
from the Malchut in the Rosh once more and it is therefore considered
to have departed there and become separated. At that time a Zivug
Elyon comes out on it, extending a new Koma of Eser Sefirot to the
Guf.
It has been explained there that the last Behina does not leave a
Reshimo. Since here the last Behina was Behina Gimel, you find that
Behina Gimel did not leave a Reshimo, hence it is not contained in the
Masach.
The greatest Reshimo in it is Behina Bet. Hence, when the Masach
regained the Aviut through its Hitkalelut in the Zivug of Rosh it could
not thicken more than Behina Bet. You find that the Koma that came
out there reached no more than Komat Bina. This is the second Behina
of the Hitpashtut of the Ohr after its second Histalkut.
47. The second Behina is simple since now it returned to being Matei
in Keter. At that time it is Lo Matei in Hochma, Bina and Hesed,
and Matei in Gevura. Lo Matei in Tifferet and Matei in Netzah, Lo
Matei in Hod and Matei in Yesod, and Lo Matei in Malchut, etc. etc.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 110 ---
47. The second Behina is simple since now it returned to being Matei
in Keter.
As has been explained in the previous item, after the second Histalkut
that was made, the Masach with the Reshimot contained in it returned
to the Masach in the Malchut of the Rosh where a new Zivug emerged
on that Masach. Since all it had is Aviut of Behina Bet, it extended
only Komat Bina. This Komat Bina expanded once more into the Guf
to the Kli de Keter, and this is Matei in Keter, meaning the Ohr Bina
in Kli de Keter.
Here too the Kelim preceded the Orot since all those Kelim that
remained empty after the second Histalkut of Partzuf AB passed to
this new Partzuf. It is written above regarding AB that all the empty
Kelim that remained after the first Histalkut passed to Hitpashtut Bet,
called AB, and so it is here. Also, all four Behinot of Zachar and
Nekeva that were in Partzuf AB apply here too, but with a different
Koma since there is only a small Koma here in the Partzuf in general.
Let us explain the four couples of Zachar and Nekeva in this Partzuf.
That Koma of the Ohr Bina that descended to the Keter is the Behinat
Nekeva of the Kli de Keter.
The Reshimo of Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut was made into the
Behinat Zachar de Kli de Keter de AB in Partzuf AB (see Ohr Pnimi
item 6, and all the Rav’s words there apply here too). Similarly here,
the Reshimo of Behina Gimel from the Behinat Hitlabshut that
remained in Kli de Keter of Partzuf AB was made here into the Zachar
de Keter of the Partzuf de Komat Bina.
It receives from the Ohr Hochma that rose under the Malchut of Rosh
de AB during the second Histalkut and does not return to the Guf of
Partzuf Bina. In other words, it is exactly like the Zachar de Keter of
the Partzuf AB.
Hence, Keter of Partzuf Bina too denies the He’arat GAR from the
Partzuf since the Achoraim of the Ohr Hochma under the Malchut de
Rosh is below, meaning it does not expand to the Guf.

--- PAGE 111 ---
It controls the Kli de Keter, which also turns its Achoraim below,
meaning without expanding to the Guf. It controls the Kli de Keter,
which also turns its Achoraim below and illuminates only He’arat
VAK and denies He’arat GAR from the Partzuf.
It is written, “Matei in Keter. At that time it is Lo Matei in Hochma,
Bina and Hesed.” This is because the Achoraim of Kli Keter deny any
He’arat GAR from the Partzuf, even from the Kli de Hochma, much
less for He’arat GAR of the Rosh, Toch, Sof of the seven lower Sefirot.
It is written, “Matei in Gevura. Lo Matei in Tifferet and Matei in
Netzah, Lo Matei in Hod and Matei in Yesod, and Lo Matei in
Malchut.” It means that then the Ohr comes to the Kelim de VAK of
the Rosh, Toch, Sof of the seven lower Sefirot, which are Sefirat
Gevura, Sefirat Netzah and Sefirat Yesod.
The Ohr Lo Matei in the Kelim de GAR of the seven lower Sefirot,
being Hesed, Tifferet, and Hod. This is so because the Achoraim de
Keter denies them of He’arat GAR, as we have explained.
Etc. etc. When Lo Matei in Keter since the Behina Gimel and Behina
Bet in it purified and the Ohr Keter returned to its place, Keter’s
power of dominion has ceased. At that time it residue descends to
Hochma and the Kelim de He’arat GAR in the RTS of the seven lower
Sefirot, which are Hesed, Tifferet, and Hod, attain their dominion, and
the Malchut receives her Behina of Dalet ד.
Now we shall explain the Zachar and Nekeva de Kli de Hochma. The
Zachar and Nekeva in the Kli de Keter mate and procreate Zachar and
Nekeva in their image. The Zachar extends from the Tzura of the
Zachar, meaning Behinat VAK without GAR, since the Achoraim of
the Ohr Hochma that stand under Malchut de Rosh is turned down
toward the Ne’etzalim in the Guf.
Hence, the Zachar de Keter has only VAK without GAR and for that
reason the Zachar that is born from him has only VAK without GAR.
The Nekeva de Keter also administers her Tzura to the Nekeva that
was born from her, which is the Behinat Ohr Bina.

--- PAGE 112 ---
After that the Kli de Keter purifies and turns its Panim downward,
meaning it purifies to Behina Aleph and gives these three Orot to the
Kli de Hochma. These are the Zachar, which is Behinat VAK de
Hochma, and Nekeva, which is Behinat Ohr Bina and Koma of Behina
Aleph which is the Ohr Hesed that also contains the seven lower
Sefirot. In other words, it is just as we have explained in the emanation
of ZON de Kli de Bina in the above Partzuf AB.
The only difference is that here the degrees are lower and all the
Behinot Ohr in the Kli de Bina de AB are here in the Kli de Hochma,
and the Kli de Bina is incorporated here with the Kli de Hochma.
However, Reshimot ZON from the time it was in Partzuf AB from
before the second Histalkut did remain in the Bina, though not
distinguished by a name since they are equal with the ZON in the Kli
de Hochma.
Also, there was a Zivug in ZON de Kli de Bina in Partzuf AB that
procreated one Hey that came down with the Ohr of the seven lower
Sefirot until it reached Yesod and Malchut. The Vav in her took the
Yesod and the Dalet in her took the Malchut.
In just that manner the ZON in Kli de Hochma mated here in Partzuf
Bina and procreated one Hey too, which in turn descended with the
ZAT, Kli by Kli until it reached the Kelim de Yesod and Malchut. The
Yesod took the Vav in her and Malchut took the Dalet in her.
Thus we have explained the four males and four females in the Kelim
de Eser Sefirot of the new Partzuf here from Komat Bina. This is
because the Zachar of Kli de Keter is Behinat VAK de Hochma and
the Nekeva de Keter is the Komat Bina.
The Zachar and Nekeva in the Kli de Hochma are also VAK de
Hochma to the Zachar, and Komat Bina to the Nekeva. In every place,
the upshots are considered Behinat VAK compared to their
progenitors. Here, however, the Zachar de Keter has a great, immense
Ohr, called VAK de Hochma because of the Achoraim de Ohr Hochma
in the Rosh that control it so as to give only VAK.

--- PAGE 113 ---
Hence, its progeny is considered VAK too, like him, since he comes in
Kli de Hochma that has no Achoraim. Also, the Nekeva is considered
Komat Bina as the Nukva de Keter that procreated her since she also
has a Reshimo de Komat Bina in the Kli de Hochma that remained
there since the time of the Hitpashtut AB. It connects with this Nukva
and thus she too attains Komat Bina. Thus we learn that the Behinot
ZON de Kli of Hochma is VAK de Hochma to the Zachar and Komat
Bina to the Nekeva, like ZON de Keter.
We have already learned that the ZON de Kli of Bina are the Behinot
of the Reshimot that remained from the time of the previous
Hitpashtut de AB. They are mixed with the Zachar and Nekeva de Kli
de Hochma since they are close to one another.
The Zachar in ZON de ZAT is the Ohr Hesed that was emanated by
the ZON de Kli de Keter after their Hizdakchut to Behina Aleph. The
Nekeva in the ZAT is the above Hey that was emanated by the ZON in
Kli de Hochma. This Hey was also divided into ZON, meaning to Vav
and Dalet. The Vav clothed in the Kli de Yesod and the Dalet in the Kli
Malchut, and these are the Behinot Small ZON in the ZAT.
You find that all the conducts of emanation present in Hitpashtut Bet,
called AB de AK, were also present in Partzuf Bina de AK, only one
degree lower. The Behinat ZON de Hochma de AB rose in Partzuf
Bina to ZON de Keter. The Behinat ZON de Bina de AB rose here to
ZON de Hochma.
Also, the Ohr ZA emanated in Partzuf AB from the Kli Hochma is
emanated from the Kli Keter here. In addition, the Hey that was
emanated from the Kli Bina in Partzuf AB, is emanated here from the
Kli de Hochma, etc. similarly.
All this stems from the general decline that was here when Hochma
remained in the Rosh and only Ohr Bina came to clothe in the Guf.
You find that Ohr Bina clothed Kli de Keter and Ohr ZA came to Kli
de Hochma, meaning after the ZON de Keter purified to Behina Aleph.
Ohr Malchut is in Kli de Bina since that Hey that was emanated from

--- PAGE 114 ---
the Hochma came to the Kli de Bina and from there expanded to the
ZAT.
Now we shall explain the order of Matei ve Lo Matei, practiced in
Partzuf Bina de AK, also called Partzuf SAG de AK and the matter of
Matei ve Lo Matei that is permanent in this Partzuf. We have already
explained the order of the first Hitpashtut of this Partzuf (Ohr Pnimi
item 47).
We learned there that when Komat Bina expanded to the Partzuf and
Ohr Bina Matei in Kli de Keter, the Ohr reaches all the Kelim of the
dominion of VAK in the Partzuf according to their impressions during
Hitpashtut Bet before its Histalkut.
This is so because these are the very Kelim that had come into that
Partzuf Bina. Hence, the Ohr reached the three Kelim de Behinat
Achoraim in the Rosh, Toch, Sof in ZAT, which are Gevura, Netzah,
Yesod.
Their He’arah continues until the ZON de Kli de Keter purified to
Behina Aleph and these ZON rose to their Shoresh. At that time Matei
in HB to the Zachar, meaning in the ZON in Hochma and Bina, which
are Behinat VAK de Hochma, and Behinat Komat Bina to the Nekeva.
Then He’arat GAR reaches the Partzuf and Matei in all the Kelim de
Panim present in the RTS in the ZAT. These are Hesed, Tifferet, Hod,
and the fourth Ohr to Malchut.
We could say that Lo Matei in Hochma before the Kli de Keter
purified to Behina Aleph, at which time it turned its Panim and gave
the Ohr Hesed to the Kli de Hochma. Thus, ZON de Hochma too
should have lessened to Behina Aleph.
The thing is that the Kli de Keter dispensed the ZON to Kli de Hochma
from Behinat He’arah before it purified to Behina Aleph [as the Rav
wrote regarding the Zachar de Kli de Bina that was emanated from the
Kli de Hochma during Hitpashtut Bet (item 38 and Ohr Pnimi there)].
Only after the ZON descended to the Kli of Hochma did the Kli de
Keter purify and lowered Behina Aleph, meaning the Ohr Hesed, to

--- PAGE 115 ---
the Kli of Hochma. Now there are three Orot in this Kli, which are
Zachar, in VAK de Hochma, Nukva in Komat Bina, and Ohr Hesed,
which is the Ohr ZA.
You also know that ZON de Hochma mated and procreated Hey ה,
which is the Behinat Nekeva to the Ohr Hesed that came to Kli de
Bina. At that time the ZON de HB purified from Behina Bet to Behina
Aleph and turned their Panim downward, as with Hitpashtut Bet,
giving the Ohr Hesed with the above Hey to the Kli de Hesed.
After that Gevura rose to the Kli de Hesed and the Kli de Gevura
turned its Panim downward, giving her residue in He’arat GAR to the
Tifferet. Then Lo Matei in Netzah since it rose to the Tifferet and
turned its Panim down, giving its residue to Hod in He’arat GAR.
After that Lo Matei in Yesod since it rose to Hod, at which time Yesod
turned its Panim and gave its residue to Malchut, which is the Dalet ד
of the above Hey ה.
You should also remember what the Rav wrote above that the Kelim
illuminated for each other before they turned their Panim to give the
Orot. This is because they are all on an even Koma.
This means that they gave the Hey ה that was born from the above
Zivug ZON to each other before they turned their Panim. Only Bina
could not give the above Hey to Hesed before she turned her Panim.
This is so because there is a difference of Koma between the Bina and
the Kli de Hesed; one is GAR and the other is VAK.
This is not so between the Kelim de ZAT themselves, whose Koma is
even (see item 38). Therefore, after the above ה reached the Kli de
Hesed, the Kli de Hesed gave it to the Kli de Gevura before she turned
her Panim downward.
Hence, afterwards, when she turned her Panim downward, she gave
the above ה along with her residue to the Kli de Tifferet. Kli de Tifferet
gave the above ה to Kli de Netzah before it turned its Panim
downward.

--- PAGE 116 ---
Afterwards, when the Kli de Netzah turned its Panim downward, it
gave the above ה to Kli de Hod, along with its residue. Similarly, Kli
de Hod gave the ה to the Kli de Yesod before turning its Panim down.
Afterwards, when it turned its Panim downward, it gave the Dalet ד of
that ה to the Kli de Malchut.
You already know the two matters regarding the turning of the Panim
downward (see Ohr Pnimi item 40, paragraph, “You must
remember”). The first is from the Behinat Kli. It turns the place of her
administration from He’arat VAK to He’arat GAR, or vise versa. The
second is from the Behinat Masach, where its greater Aviut is the
Behinat Panim, and the lesser Aviut is the inverting of the Panim.
In all the Kelim de ZA, whose Koma is even from Behina Aleph, the
turning of the Panim in them is only from the Behinat Kelim. Still, the
Masach did not purify during the turning of the Panim, except in the
turning of the Panim in Yesod.
In that state the Masach de Behina Aleph had already purified to
Komat Malchut. Thus, after the Ohr of the Dalet ד reached Malchut as
well, Malchut too purified and the entire Aviut ceased in the Masach.
In that state the Zivug had been cancelled and all the Ohr departed
from the Partzuf. Then all the Orot rise in Behinat MAN to the Kli de
Keter, to the ZON de Keter there, and then their Masach thickens to
Behina Bet once more.
It mates with the Ohr Elyon once more and once again extends Komat
Bina, as in the beginning. Ohr Bina is then Matei in Kli de Keter, and
is Matei in Gevura, Netzah and Yesod as well. It is not Matei in
Hochma, Bina, and Hesed, Tifferet, Hod, and Malchut.
After that the Masach de Behinat ZON de Keter purifies once more
and then Matei in HB, Hesed, and Tifferet, in Hod and in Malchut. It is
Lo Matei in Keter, Gevura, Netzah, and Yesod.
Since it is Matei to Malchut, the Zivug stops, and the Orot depart and
rise to Kli de Keter as MAN to the ZON there. Komat Bina extends to
the Keter once more and it is once more Matei in Keter, Gevura,

--- PAGE 117 ---
Netzah, Yesod, and Lo Matei in Hochma, Bina, Hesed, Tifferet, Hod,
and Malchut, and so on and so forth.
This is so because thus the Orot always turn in this Partzuf, once in
Keter, Gevura, Netzah, Yesod, and once in Hochma, Bina, Hesed,
Tifferet, Hod, and Malchut. They are like candlelight, swaying here
and there.
The reason for it is that the Masach de Behina Bet is a frail Masach, as
it is Behinat Achoraim de Bina to the Hochma. It sucks its power from
there, as you already know that the Behinat Achoraim de Bina on the
Hochma is rooted back in Bina of the Ohr Yashar. It turns backwards
to Hochma and extends Hassadim from Keter in the form of Yod י and
Nun נ of the Tzadik צ, which are opposite to one another.
For this reason the craving for Hassadim was imprinted in Bina, to
prefer the Ohr Hassadim to the Ohr Hochma, as it is written, “because
He delighteth in mercy,” as the Rav says above (item 43). Hence, after
the Zivug is made on the Masach of Behina Bet and the Ohr expands
to the Partzuf, Bina already has Ohr Hassadim abundantly.
At that time the Masach weakens and purifies because the Achoraim
de Ima on the Hochma cancel too. Though she prefers Ohr Hassadim
to Ohr Hochma, it is only when there is a need for Ohr de Hassadim.
However, after there is Ohr Hassadim abundantly, she turns herself
back to the Ohr Hochma and cancels her Achoraim.
Naturally, the Masach that is supported by these Achoraim gradually
purifies as well, until it purifies into Behinat Keter. At that time the
Zivug stops, and when the Orot depart from the Partzuf and their
Reshimot ascend to Kli de Keter, contained in the purified Masach,
Bina feels the lack of Hassadim once more and her Achoraim return to
Hochma, to its place.
In that state the Masach of Behina Bets there thickens once more by
the force of the Achoraim de Bina, and the Zivug returns once more,
extending the Koma de Behina Bet. The abundant Ohr de Hassadim
returns to the Partzuf and Bina annuls her Achoraim over Hochma
once more.

--- PAGE 118 ---
After that the Masach purifies once more, until it purifies entirely. Ohr
Hassadim ceases once more and the craving Reshimot again rise to
Behinat MAN to the Kli de Keter. She feels the lack of Hassadim once
more and returns her Achoraim to Hochma, at which time the Masach
thickens to Behina Bet once more and mates with the Ohr Elyon and
so on and so forth like a swaying candlelight.
It has now been explained how the Matei ve Lo Matei in this Partzuf is
fixed and always existing. The Koma de Behina Bet Matei to the Kli
de Keter, Netzah and Yesod also Matei in Gevura. These are Behinat
Ohr Hassadim without He’arat GAR, but it is in great abundance
since they extend from the Kli de Keter.
For that reason Bina cancels her Achoraim and the Masach purifies.
At that time Matei in Hochma, Bina and He’arat GAR reaches the
Partzuf, and Matei in the Kelim de Panim as well, which are Hesed,
Tifferet, and Hod, until Matei in Malchut.
At that time the Aviut of the Masach ceases and the Zivug stops. The
Masach with the Reshimot of the Orot rises to Kli de Keter because of
the Hishtavut Tzura.
In that state Bina feels the lack of Hassadim, returns her Achoraim to
Hochma as in the beginning and the Masach thickens to Behina Bet
once more and mates with the Ohr Elyon. Ohr Bina is Matei to the Kli
de Keter once more; it is again Matei in Keter, Gevura, Netzah, and
Yesod, and Lo Matei in Hochma, Bina, and Hesed, Tifferet, Hod, and
Malchut, and so on and so forth.
48. Now there are several Behinot: The first is the unending craving
of the Ohr of the Tachton to cleave to the Elyon. When there is
Matei in Yesod there is Lo Matei in Malchut since then the Ohr
Malchut ascends there in Yesod because of the craving.
It is similar in all the other Sefirot except the Hesed with the Bina.
This is because when there is Lo Matei in Bina, there is Lo Matei in
Hesed, due to the two distances. When it is Matei in Bina, it is also
Matei in Hesed, as Ohr Hesed is not equal to the entire Ohr Bina.

--- PAGE 119 ---
However, that one moment when Bina descends to her place, she
finds Hesed in her place and Hesed descends to his place instantly.
This is the meaning of the VAK being a degree in and of
themselves and cannot cleave to Bina, which is from GAR.
The matter of Matei ve Lo Matei in GAR is also a different matter.
This is because when it is Matei in Keter, both Hochma and Bina
rise up in Keter. For that reason the GAR are regarded as one.
When Lo Matei in Keter, then Matei in Hochma. Bina should
remain there and be Lo Matei in Bina. However, “because He
delighteth in mercy,” it is Matei in Bina too.
49. You should also know that the measure of time of Lo Matei in the
Sefira is only one moment. This is the meaning of, “For His anger
is but for a moment.”
It is so because the Histalkut of the Ohr when it is Lo Matei was
because of the wrath and also because the Tachtonim do not have
the strength. However, the continuation of Behinat Matei, which is
the return of the Ohr below to revive the Olamot, has no measure
since it will be according to the act of the Tachtonim.
This is the meaning of, “life in His will,” according to the desire
that will then be, meaning according to the act of humans, so will
the stretch of these lives be. Indeed, we have explained above that
the first Histalkut of the Orot was in order to make a Kli.
Now that the Orot returned a second time in Hitpashtut Bet, the
Kelim were annulled as in the beginning. Hence, the first Ohr,
being Ohr Keter, had to have remained above in all of them and
not permeate these Kelim.
Thus, only nine Orot came in this order, Ohr Hochma in the Kli of
Keter, and Ohr Bina in the Kli of Hochma, etc. similarly. Finally,
Ohr Malchut permeates Kli Yesod.
Now the first Ohr did not return to the Kli that concerns it, which
first departed from it. Instead, a different, smaller Ohr came in its

--- PAGE 120 ---
place. Hence, the Kelim remained as Kelim; they did not return to
being Orot, as before.
When the Orot began to enter the Kelim, the nine Orot entered
Keter, which is the Ohr Hochma. This is called Matei in Keter.
After that the Ohr that reaches Keter departed, namely Ohr
Hochma, and this is called Lo Matei. We should not elaborate in
that since we have already elaborated sufficiently in Behinat Matei
ve Lo Matei.
Yet, the reason that all nine Orot entered the Kli of Keter together
in Hitpashtut Aleph is that one entered the other. Ohr Malchut
entered the Kli of Keter. Afterwards this Ohr was pushed down to
the place of Hochma. Then Ohr Yesod entered Keter etc. similarly.
Finally, all ten Orot entered in the amount of the ten Kelim. The
reason is understood with the above. In the beginning, when Ohr
Keter was with them and they all illuminated from its side, none of
those Kelim had the strength to receive inside, but only one Ohr.
Now, however, when Ohr Keter did not enter the Kli, but remained
above and turned its Achoraim downward, because of that there is
now strength to instill all the Orot together into one Kli. This is so
because all nine Orot that now enter Keter, are smaller than the
first Ohr Keter and there is ability to receive them.
Also, when all eight Orot entered Kli de Hochma, it has the power
to receive them, as they are all smaller than Ohr Hochma, etc.
similarly in all of them.
Ohr Pnimi
49. The measure of time of Lo Matei in the Sefira is only one moment.
This means that the length of time of the departure of the Ohr from the
entire Partzuf is a moment, meaning the time for the ascents of the
Orot to MAN to the Kli de Keter, to the ZON there. It is so because at
that time there is no Zivug in the Partzuf since the Masach purified
from its entire Aviut. For that reason it is considered a time of wrath.

--- PAGE 121 ---
He thus tells us that the matter of Matei ve Lo Matei in the Partzuf
sways here and there incessantly since at the moment of Lo Matei in
Malchut, the Orot rise to ZON de Keter and the Achoraim de Bina
return to their place at once. Then the aviut de Behina Bet returns and
the Ohr of Komat Bina Matei to the Keter at once.
Thus, this whole thing is like candlelight, swaying here and there. This
is because the darkness that is made in the Partzuf during the ascent of
the Orot to MAN and before the Zivug is made, is very short.
Because of the wrath and also because the Tachtonim do not have
the strength… in order to make a Kli.
All of these three reasons are one thing. This is the meaning of what
our sages wrote, “In the beginning, it came up in the thought to create
the world in Midat ha Din; He saw that the world does not exist, He
brought Midat ha Rachamim and associated it with Midat ha Din (Part
4, Chap 1, Ohr Pnimi item 4).
It means that the Shoresh of Midat ha Din is Behina Dalet. This is
what emerged first, in Hitpashtut Aleph, when there was only one Kli
of Malchut there from the Behina of Aviut de Behina Dalet. This is the
meaning of, “came up in the thought to create the world in Midat ha
Din.
However, he saw that the world does not exist, that there is no force in
the Tachtonim to receive the Ohr from this hard Mida (the noun of
Midat). Hence, he associated Midat ha Rachamim with it, which is the
Behinat Bina, called Midat ha Rachamim in all the places.
This is implied in the Zohar (Ruth) relating to the verse, “So they two
went,” which are the two Heyin of the Name HaVaYaH that were
contained as one. It explains that the first Hey is the Name HaVaYaH
is Behinat Bina, and the last Hey of the Name HaVaYaH is the Behinat
Malchut. They were associated together for the purpose of correcting
the world, meaning Midat ha Rachamim with Midat ha Din.
This association did not occur at once, but bit-by-bit, in the order of
the concatenation of the Partzufim and the degrees. This work was

--- PAGE 122 ---
done entirely by the Histalkut of the Orot.
It is so because during the first Histalkut the Masach of Behina Dalet
had already began to mingle in the first nine Sefirot through its ascent
from degree to degree until it reached the Maatzil. Also, most of the
force of the Din disappeared from the Masach there since Behina
Dalet did not leave a Reshimo for the Hamshacha of the Orot.
That became the Shoresh of the division of the degree to Zachar and
Nekeva, since only half a Reshimo of Behina Dalet returned for
Hitpashtut Bet, meaning the Reshimo de Hitlabshut. This became the
Behinat Zachar de Kli de Keter of Hitpashtut Bet, and it is indeed
considered half a thing since it lacks the Behinat Hamshacha of Orot.
For this reason it has become obligated to complete the degree of
Behina Gimel in Behinat Hamshacha. Note, that the rule that a Zachar
without a Nekeva is half a Guf extends from here.
Afterwards, in the second Histalkut, the Reshimo of Hamshacha de
Behina Gimel disappeared as well, and only Behina Bet remained,
though the Zachar of Behina Gimel from Behinat Hitlabshut
participated with her in Kli de Keter. This association extends here too
in all the couples of Zachar and Nekeva in this Partzuf Bina.
However, it still could not be finished before the elicitation of Bina
outside GAR and the coming to Behinat VAK. This matter was
prepared by the Matei ve Lo Matei that sways in this Partzuf Bina, as
it is written in its place.
At that time Olam Nekudim came out, where the Bina emerged from
Behinat GAR to Behinat VAK. Yet, there was the breaking of the
vessels and the matter was ended in Olam ha Tikun, in Olam ha
Atzilut, where the complete association of Midat ha Rachamim with
Midat ha Din emerged.
Thus you see how the Matei ve Lo Matei in this Partzuf is the origin
of the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din. He says that the
matter of the Histalkut of the Ohr that always sways because of the

--- PAGE 123 ---
Matei ve Lo Matei is “because of the wrath,” meaning due to the force
of the Din in Behina Dalet, and the world does not exist in it.
This is so because the Tachtonim do not have the strength, which is
also the same, meaning that the world cannot exist in it. It is “in order
to make a Kli,” meaning so that the Atzmut can clothe in it in a way
that there will not be Hizdakchut and Histalkut Orot any more.
This was made only at the completion of the association of Midat ha
Rachamim and Midat ha Din together, and not before. This is so
because until then the Orot were departing in each Partzuf and the
Kelim were not fit for their task. He writes, “in order to make a Kli.”
Thus, all these three reasons that the Rav mentions are one thing.
The act of humans, so will the stretch of these lives be.
Note that this does not refer to the order of the emanation of the
Partzufim from above downward since there are still no people here
who can corrupt or correct. Instead, this refers to the time after the
four Olamot are proper. At that time the actions of the Tachtonim can
prolong the Upper Life in this Partzuf, or shorten it.
The good deeds draw increased Shefa. Also, it is known that any
Hidush of administration must extend from Ein Sof. Thus, if one
causes a renewal of administration in one’s actions, it extends from
Ein Sof, travels through Olam ha Tzimtzum and from there to the first
Partzuf de AK. From there on to the second Partzuf de AK and from
there to this third Partzuf, where the matter of Matei ve Lo Matei is
set. From here on to the rest of the degrees in the four Olamot ABYA,
reaching this world to be received by Man.
Hence, if the act is complete, you find that the Shefa travels through
this Partzuf Bina and sways there in a way of Matei ve Lo Matei.
When the time of Matei ve Lo Matei reaches that degree to which the
Shefa is ascribed, it does not move from there quickly, but stretches
the time.
By that the Shefa extends the time of reception when it reaches a
person in this world too. This is called that one’s life is prolonged. If,

--- PAGE 124 ---
however, the act is flawed, the Shefa sways through there very quickly
because when the Shefa Matei in the designated degree, it does not
extend time. Instead, it immediately comes to a state of Lo Matei.
Thus, when the Shefa reaches a person in this world, he unable to keep
it, but only to a very short time. This is the meaning of the wicked
being “of few days, and full of trouble.” However, here we must
remember the meaning of time in spirituality as it has been explained
in the end Histaklut Pnimit Part 1.
50. *When the Orot reenter, Ohr Hochma enters in Keter. At that time
the Ohr Keter inside it, which remained during the Histalkut since
the Kli is not completed before the Ohr drifts three degrees away
from it, and this does not apply to GAR, then the Ohr Keter that
remained there inside the Ohr Hochma now enters and clothes
inside it.
It becomes a Neshama to it since it is the Ohr Keter and becomes
Dechura while the Hochma around it becomes Nukva. At that time
the selected Ohr clothes inside Hochma and what slightly
darkened due to the distance of the Orot from there will remain as
Kli.
It is so for two reasons: A – because of the distancing of the Ohr
from there, which induces darkness to it. Moreover, even the best
of it leaves and clothes inside the Ohr Hochma that enters there.
At that time the first Ohr that remains from Keter is deducted and
becomes a Kli for Keter since the Ohr Hochma severs them. Thus,
on the contrary, the coming of the Orot in their current Hitpashtut
is the cause of the making of the Kli in these GAR. The Kelim were
not made during their Histalkut.
There is yet another reason: The Ohr of Behinat Keter remained
above since it never again entered these Kelim, but only remained
at the end of these Yod Shorashim or Orot above. It turned its
Achoraim downward, hence the Orot are now fewer than in the
beginning, even during the Histalkut.

--- PAGE 125 ---
It is similar in the second Kli of Hochma that Ohr Bina entered
inside it. At that time the Ohr Hochma clothes inside it and the
Ohr that remains darkens and becomes a Kli because of its
distancing, though it is not complete remoteness.
Now there are Zachar and Nekeva in the Keter together and
Zachar and Nekeva in Hochma. You find that Keter and Hochma
are never cancelled from existence and make females from males
since their Orot themselves remain in their place, though they are
not as complete as in the beginning. Moreover, the rest of the Orot
that have now come, are added to them and become females to
them.
Ohr Pnimi
50. Three degrees away from it, and this does not apply to GAR.
It has already been explained above in Ohr Pnimi regarding the Rav’s
words (item 27) that there are two necessary conditions to complete
the Kli. The first is completing the outer half of the wall. This is
discerned as the place to receive the Ohr Makif.
Since there is no Ohr that does not have Pnimi and Makif, there is also
no Kli that does not have a Kli Pnimi and Kli Hitzon, qualified to
receive the two Behinot in the Ohr. Hence, the Rav calls them two
halves of the wall (see Part 4, Chap 5, item 5), since it is a necessary
condition in the wall of the Kli, meaning as a qualification of the Kli
to receive any Ohr within. This is the first condition.
The second condition is that at one time it will be empty of any Ohr,
even Behinat Ohr Makif, as it is the Histalkut of the Ohr that makes it
a Kli.
For this reason the Kelim that were made in Hitpashtut Aleph were
only for the ZAT, which are ZON since Malchut attained the inner
NRNHY in completeness during the Hitpashtut. Hence, when she rose
to ZA, she acquired the first Ohr Makif and when she rose to Bina she
attained the second Ohr Makif. When she rose to Hochma she no
longer received any Ohr, as the Rav says (Part 4, Chap 6, item 15).

--- PAGE 126 ---
Hence, when she drifted three degrees away from her Kli, namely
Hochma, Bina, and ZA, and came to Hochma, the two above
conditions were completed, as she had already attained the outer half
of the wall to receive the two Makifim. After that she does not receive
any Ohr, hence her Kli is completed.
However, the ZA is not finished before it comes to the Maatzil because
when ZA ascends to Keter, it receives the second Ohr Makif there. For
that reason there is no longer complete Histalkut of the Ohr from its
Kli. Afterwards, when it departs from Keter too and comes to the
Maatzil, its Kli darkens and ends.
However, the GAR, which are KHB, did not receive any Makifim there
in Hitpashtut Aleph. Also, the Ohr did not stop entirely from them
since even when the Bina comes to Keter she still receives her Behinat
inner Yechida. For this reason they lack the two conditions and that is
why they were not made into Kelim to the GAR in that Hitpashtut
Aleph.
The selected Ohr clothes inside Hochma and what slightly
darkened due to the distance of the Orot from there will remain as
Kli.
This means that the Reshimo consists of Ohr and Kli like the
collective Ohr from which it remained. You already know from the
Rav’s words above (Part 4, Chap 6 item 2) that before it departed in
Hitpashtut Aleph, the two Orot were mixed with the Kelim, and there
is no discrimination of a Kli there.
Hence, the other Reshimot that remain of these Orot too, were also
mixed of Ohr and Kli together (see Part 4, Histaklut Pnimit item 48).
It is all the more so in the Kelim de GAR as even the Kelim themselves
are still not considered Kelim.
Hence, now the Orot returned in Hitpashtut Bet and came Zachar and
Nekeva in Kli de Keter. The Zachar is from the Behinat Reshimo de
Ohr Keter de Hitpashtut Aleph. The Reshimo is divided into two
Behinot Ohr and Kli in it.

--- PAGE 127 ---
The best in it, the Behinat Ohr, becomes the Behinat Ohr of the
Zachar de Kli de Keter, and the worst in it, the Behinat Kli that was
mixed in it, departs from it because of the Ohr Hochma that clothed
that Kli de Keter too. Since the Ohr Hochma clothed in the Kli of the
Reshimo the Hochma separates between the Ohr of the Reshimo and
its Kli. At that time the Kli darkens and the Behinat Kli ends in it, as
the Rav says.
Their current Hitpashtut is the cause of the making of the Kli in
these GAR.
This is so because the Ohr of Hochma that clothed the Kli de Keter
separated between the Ohr and the Kli of the Reshimo, which weakens
the Reshimo of Hitpashtut Aleph too. As long as the Reshimo is
complete, the Kli is strengthened by the Reshimo in it even after the
Ohr drifts three degrees away from it.
However, now the Behinat Reshimo too has weakened after the
Behinat Kli has been deducted from it. By that it also attains the
Behinat outer half of the wall, since the Kli consists of the Behina
Gimel too because of her clothing of Ohr Hochma, which is Behina
Gimel, being Behinat Hitzoniut to Behina Dalet.
Similarly, the Kli de Hochma of Hitpashtut Aleph that Ohr Bina
clothes, attains half of its outer wall since Ohr ZA is Behina Aleph,
being Hitzoniut to Behina Bet. Thus, the Kelim de GAR were made by
the current Hitpashtut and the Etzem of the Hitpashtut causes them to
be made into Kelim.
The Rav gives three reasons here regarding the completion of the
Kelim de GAR:
1. Due to the exit and distancing of the best Ohr of the Reshimo from the
worst, most Av Ohr in it. Hence, the Ohr Av of the Reshimo became a
complete Kli.
2. The coming of a new Ohr of Hochma, clothing that Ohr Av of the
Reshimo which comes between and separates the best Ohr of the

--- PAGE 128 ---
Reshimo from the most Av Ohr of the Reshimo. This makes the Av Ohr
a complete Kli.
3. Because of the Achoraim of the Ohr Keter that remains standing in the
Rosh and did not expand to the Guf once more in this Hitpashtut Bet.
These Achoraim lessen the Ohr GAR even more than it was during the
departure itself. Thus, it darkens the Kelim more than a distance of
three degrees and therefore they have not become Kelim during the
making of the Achoraim of the Kelim under the Malchut of the Rosh.
Zachar and Nekeva in the Keter together and Zachar and Nekeva
in Hochma.
The Reshimo de Keter de Hitpashtut Aleph has become the Zachar de
Keter, and the Reshimo de Hochma of Hitpashtut Aleph has become
the Zachar de Hochma. Also, Ohr Hochma de Hitpashtut Bet that
comes anew has become the Behinat Nekeva de Kli de Hochma.
51. It is the same matter in Bina too, except there is a difference in
her, which is that some Ohr Bina remains in her during the
Histalkut, and now Ohr Hesed enters her.
It is known that Hesed is the son of Bina and it cannot be the
Zachar while the Ohr Bina itself a Nekeva to it. If we say that the
Ohr Bina will be a Zachar and the Ohr Hesed will be a Nekeva,
that too is impossible.
This is why that turning Panim be Panim that we described above
is needed. When the eight Orot are given to her, Hochma turns her
Panim downward and the Zachar and Nekeva of Hochma mate
there in their place.
They educe one Ohr through their Zivug, called Yod, which is then
dispensed below by turning their Panim to Bina. At that time that
Yod clothes inside the Ohr Bina as the others did, the Yod becomes
a Zachar, and the Bina Nukva.
Afterwards, when the seven Orot are placed in the Kli of Bina, the
Ohr Hesed is placed in her and the Ohr Hesed remains in her in
Behinat MAN permanently.

--- PAGE 129 ---
Ohr Pnimi
51. That the Ohr Bina will be a Zachar and the Ohr Hesed will be a
Nekeva, that too is impossible.
This is so because the Eser Sefirot are discerned as two males, being
Hochma and ZA, and two Nekevot (pl. for Nekeva), which are Bina
and Malchut. Zachar means Hitpashtut of Ohr and Nekeva means
reception of Ohr.
Your sign is that the Zachar faces downwards to dispense to the
Tachtonim, and the Nekeva faces upward, to receive. This relationship
is rooted back in the Eser Sefirot of Ohr Yashar since Keter de Ohr
Yashar is the Shoresh and the first Hitpashtut from the Shoresh is Ohr
Hochma. The second Hitpashtut is Ohr de Hassadim, meaning the ZA,
and they are both discerned as Zecharim (pl. for Zachar).
Bina is the Nekeva of Hochma, and Malchut is the Nekeva of the ZA.
He writes that it cannot be said that Ohr Bina will be a Zachar and
Ohr Hesed will be a Nekeva. This is so because the nature of the Orot
is opposite at their Shoresh: Ohr Hesed is Zachar, meaning Ohr ZA,
and Ohr Bina is Nekeva, as we have explained.
Hochma turns her Panim downward etc. This has already been
explained above (Ohr Pnimi item 35, sub header “Hochma”) and
study it there.
Mate etc. one Ohr through their Zivug, called Yod.
Regarding this Zivug see Ohr Pnimi item 35. Although this Zachar
comes from the Zivug de HB, it is considered their Behinat VAK where
each upshot is regarded as VAK of its progenitors. However, since it is
VAK de Hochma, which is Yod י, its own value is also considered Yod.
However, a true Behinat VAK is always named in Vav ו.
That Yod clothes inside the Ohr Bina.
This means the reshimot that remain in the Kli de Bina from the time
of Hitpashtut Aleph, after the Ohr Bina departed from there. It is so
because all the Orot left Reshimot there in their Kelim during their

--- PAGE 130 ---
Histalkut from them, as the Rav says above (Part 4, Chap 2 item 2),
and that Reshimo in Kli de Bina became the Behinat Nekeva to the י.
52. This Ohr of Bina is among the first Orot that remained there, and
this Yod that it came into from the Zivug de ZON inside Hochma is
renewed. Hence, how will Bina, which is the Shoresh, become a
Nekeva to this renewed Ohr, which is from Hochma?
The answer is that we have already explained that this Ohr of
Bina is not a great Ohr, since there are three distances between it
and the Ohr, though they are not three complete distances. It is
not so in the Hochma above.
In addition, this Ohr Bina remained here during the Histalkut,
when his intention was not to shine, but the Upper Nukva in
Hochma intended to shine at the time of the Hitpashtut. Hence, the
son, begotten by both can be more interior than this Bina, much
less form the Hesed that now came, though it too is from the
Behina of Hitpashtut. However, it is still three degrees below
Hochma.
Ohr Pnimi
52. This Ohr of Bina is among the first Orot that remained there.
It means that this is what remains of the Orot of the first Hitpashtut de
AK, as mentioned in the previous item.
53. Generally speaking, there is YH in Keter, which is ZON, Keter and
Hochma. In Hochma there is ZON, and this is another YH, and it
is HB. In Bina there is another YH, which is ZON. It is the
renewed Hochma from the Zivug Elyon in ZON in Hochma, which
is Yod. The Bina is Nekeva to him and it is the Ot Hey. Thus there
are YH here as well. There is also Ohr Hesed in her, which is
Behinat son.
In addition, every one of these GAR is called Ot Yod in the filling.
The Keter contains Yod YH, and the Kli itself is the Dalet of the
Yod. Hochma too contains Yod, which is YH, ZON, and the Dalet is
the Kli.

--- PAGE 131 ---
However, Bina is called Yod in the Behinat three Orot in her,
ordered as YDV, and they are Hochma, Bina, and Hesed. Yet, the
Kli is not mentioned here.
There is yet another reason why the drop of Yod from the Zivug
Hochma is the husband of this lower Bina: Since when ZON in
Hochma mate, they do not educe that drop from her Atzmut, but
from above, meaning from the Keter. This is why his force is
greater than the Ohr of the lower Bina.
Ohr Pnimi
53. Bina is called Yod in the Behinat three Orot in her, ordered as
YDV.
The Zachar is named Yod after the Hochma, being her upshot. The
Nekeva, which is Bina, with the Ohr Hesed in her, is the Hey ה. The
Ohr Hesed is considered the Vav ו in the Hey and the Bina is
considered the Dalet ד that surrounds the Vav. This is so because it is
the Behinat GAR of that Vav.
54. However, there was no existence of ZON in the rest of the Sefirot,
as they are all males, and they are also complete Kelim. Only that
Ohr that has reentered is present.
Thus, the Ohr of Gevura entered in Hesed and etc. similarly until
you find that the Ohr of Malchut is in Kli of Yesod. Here there is
also a first question: How will a Zachar be turned into a Nekeva?
Know, that this is why ZON in Bina had to mate and educe one
Hey in its mold. It was divided into two, which are DV, and the Ot
Vav entered the Kli Yesod, as a Zachar of Malchut there, since this
Ot Vav is several degrees higher than the Ohr Malchut in Yesod.
This is why they are ZON. Afterwards, the Ot Dalet descended in
Malchut and completed there in her place. Thus, there are ZON in
the Dalet Behinot, which are KHB Yesod. This is the reason for the
above question in these four, unlike in the others.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 132 ---
54. Ohr of Malchut is in Kli of Yesod.
After the Behina Aleph of the Ohr Hod had purified into Behinat
Keter, meaning extending only Komat Ohr Malchut, the Ohr was
given to the Kli of Yesod. This is why he writes, “Ohr of Malchut is in
Kli of Yesod” (see above Ohr Pnimi item 45).
Vav entered the Kli Yesod, as a Zachar of Malchut there, since this
Ot Vav is several degrees higher.
This Vav ו is from Komat Behina Aleph. After Bina purified into Koma
de Behina Aleph, the above Hey ה to the Kelim de VAK along with the
Ohr Hesed.
Hod too gave the above Hey ה to the Yesod as mere He’arah and not
through the Hizdakchut of Behina Aleph (see the Rav’s words item
43). After the Hod illuminated the Hey in it, it purified into Komat
Malchut and gave this residue to the Yesod.
Thus, the ו from the ה that took the Yesod has Koma of Behina Aleph,
like the ZA. Hence, it is the Zachar of the Kli de Yesod to the Ohr of
Komat Malchut in it, which is the Nekeva in it.
He writes, “This Ot Vav is several degrees higher than the Ohr
Malchut in Yesod.” The first is that it is Komat Behina Aleph, and the
second is that it comes from the Zivug of ZON de Bina.
55. *We have already explained that there are five Orot in two Kelim.
This is because there is ZON in the Kelim of Hochma and there is
ZON in the Kli of Bina, and a son, which is the above Hesed.
These ascents depend on the actions of the Tachtonim. Sometimes
all five Orot ascend, and sometimes only four ascend and the Ohr
Hesed, which is a son, remains below in the Kli of Bina.
We have explained above that there is ZON in each of these GAR.
They are called YH, Yod in the Zachar, and Hey in the Nukva.
Know, that when all these five Orot rise in Keter, they are
sometimes incorporated in the Nukva, and sometimes in the
Dechura. Sometimes some of them are in Nukva and some of them

--- PAGE 133 ---
in the Dechura. Know, that when only four Orot ascend, they
always incorporate only in the Nukva.
Ohr Pnimi
55. There is ZON in the Kli of Bina, and a son, which is the above
Hesed.
The Zachar is the Yod that was born by the ZON de Kli de Hochma,
and the Nekeva is the Reshimo that remained in the Kli de Bina from
the time of Hitpashtut Aleph. The son there is the Ohr Hesed that
dispensed Hochma to the Kli de Bina after ZON de Hochma had
purified to Behina Aleph (see item 51).
These ascents depend on the actions of the Tachtonim.
When Lo Matei in Hochma and Bina because they purified to Behina
Aleph and Komat HB disappeared from the Partzuf, HB rise to the
Keter. Through their ascent to ZON de Keter, they induce the return of
the Aviut of Behina Gimel to the Masach de ZON de Keter.
At that time they mate with the Ohr Elyon once more and once more
extend Komat Hochma as in the beginning (see Ohr Pnimi item 36). It
is similar in the second Behina of the Hitpashtut, meaning Partzuf
Bina de AK.
When Lo Matei in Hochma, Bina, and Hesed, Tifferet, Hod, and
Malchut (see Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “You already know the two
matters”), all the Orot rise to the Keter, to the ZON there. This causes
the return of the Aviut de Behina Bet to the Masach there.
Then Komat Bina emerges once again as in the beginning on these
two kinds of ascents, namely the ascents of Hitpashtut Bet, called
Partzuf Hochma de AK, and the ascents of the second Behina of the
perpetual Hitpashtut in Matei ve Lo Matei, called Partzuf Bina de AK
(see the Rav’s words item 47). Al the words of the Rav before us
revolve around that. Regarding his statement that they are dependent
on the actions of the Tachtonim, that has been explained above (Ohr
Pnimi item 49, subsection “The act of humans”).

--- PAGE 134 ---
Sometimes all five Orot ascend, and sometimes only four ascend
and the Ohr Hesed, which is a son, remains below in the Kli of
Bina.
It is so because only four Orot rise in Partzuf Hochma, which are ZON
de Kli de Hochma, and ZON de Kli de Bina. But, the Ohr Hesed that
contains the entire ZAT does not ascend throughout the rest of
Hitpashtut Bet of the first Behina until the completion of that
Hitpashtut (see item 46 and Ohr Pnimi item 47).
In this manner, only the four Orot in HB rose to Keter throughout all
exits and entrances. It is so because only Behina Bet purified and her
Koma disappeared in the Shoresh in Keter.
Yet, Behina Aleph did not purify but only at the end of the Hitpashtut,
which is only at the coming of the Orot to Yesod and Malchut. At that
time the perpetual Hitpashtut of Matei ve Lo Matei begins, called
Partzuf Bina.
Five Orot ascend in this Partzuf since here too the Ohr Hesed that
contains the whole ZAT rises to Keter. This is so because here the
Matei ve Lo Matei applies perpetually, because every time it Matei to
Malchut, it is after the Hizdakchut de Behina Aleph.
When Malchut too purifies, all the Orot rise to Keter. Thus, every time
it is Lo Matei in the Malchut, the five Orot, which are ZON de HB,
and the Hesed that contains ZAT, rise to the Keter. He writes that
sometimes four Orot rise, meaning in Partzuf Hochma, and sometimes
five Orot ascend, meaning in Partzuf Bina.
Only four Orot ascend, they always incorporate only in the Nukva.
You know that there are Zachar and Nekeva in the Kli de Keter. There
are two Kelim in Partzuf Hochma de AK, which is Hitpashtut Bet, one
for the Zachar and the other for the Nekeva. Hence, when the Orot rise
to the Keter, they all come, meaning the four Orot, to the Kli of the
Nekeva since she receives them for MAN within her, but not the
Zachar since all the ascents for MAN are only to the Nekeva.

--- PAGE 135 ---
However, when five Orot rise, it is depicted only in a Partzuf where
there is perpetual Matei ve Lo Matei. Every Lo Matei in Malchut, all
the Orot rise to MAN to the Keter, meaning the Hesed too.
Since there is not more than one Kli de Zachar in Partzuf Bina, the
Nukva too clothes the Kli de Zachar. Hence, the Orot must ascend to
the Kli de Zachar, since the Nukva is there too.
56. We shall now explain this division, and say, that before these Orot
rise above to be incorporated in the Keter, the name YH in the
Keter is Pashut without filling. Yet, there will be filling in them
when these Orot ascend upwards.
There are three fillings, in Yodin, in Heyin, or in Alephin. When
only four Orot ascend, they are all incorporated in the Nukva,
which is the Hey of the name YH in the Keter. At that time the
filling of that Hey is in Yod, like this: HY.
Ohr Pnimi
56. The name YH in the Keter is Pashut without filling.
It is so because the ZON de Keter purified from the Behina Gimel in
them, the Zivug stopped, the Komot of the ZON departed to their
Shoresh, and only the Reshimot of ZON remained in Kli de Keter. At
that time they are considered a simple name YH, without the filling in
them, meaning the measure of Aviut that extends the measure of their
Koma and fills them with their Ohr.
In Yodin, in Heyin, or in Alephin.
The Aviut de Behina Gimel that extends Komat Hochma is called
“filling of Yodin”. Aviut de Behina Bet that extends Komat Bina is also
called “filling of Yodin”, except the Aleph in the Vav in it, such as this
Yod י׀ד, Hey ה׳, Vav ׀א׀, Hey ה׳. The Behinat ZA is HaVaYaH in
filling of Alephin, and the Behinat Malchut is HaVaYaH in filling of
Heyin.
When only four Orot ascend, they are all incorporated in the
Nukva, which is the Hey of the name YH.

--- PAGE 136 ---
It means that the Kli de Nukva is the Hey ה de YH, because only the
Kelim are called Otiot and not the Orot themselves, and remember that
(see the Rav’s words in Part 4, Chap 3, item 12). The fulfillment of
that Hey is in the Yod, like this: הי. It is so because the Aviut de Behina
Gimel is called Yod.
It has been explained above (Ohr Pnimi item 40) that because of the
ascent of the Zachar de Hochma from Aviut de Behina Gimel, the
Nukva de Keter returns and receives this Aviut de Behina Gimel in her
Masach. It follows that the Hey, which is Nukva de Keter, is filled
with Yod.
57. The thing is that when four Orot ascend in the Nukva the lower
three are cancelled in the first, since Ohr Hochma always cancels
the others, and then all three are annulled in the Ot Yod י, which is
the Hochma. This is why the filling of this Hey ה is with Yod י.
Ohr Pnimi
57. Hochma always cancels the others, and then all three are annulled
in the Ot Yod י.
It means that Komat Hochma contains within it all the other lower
Komot, as the Rav says above (item 37): “We have a great rule in our
hands: the Elyon is greater than everything below it.” Thus, each
Koma is named only after its highest Sefira.
58. However, know that ZON in the Keter rise above in their
Shorashim, which is the meaning of Lo Matei. At that time the
nine Sefirot in each of them rise, and two Malchuyot (pl. for
Malchut) remain below, the Zachar Malchut and the Nekeva
Malchut. They are called YH since they are Pshutim (pl. for
Pashut), without filling.
Ohr Pnimi
58. Two Malchuyot (pl. for Malchut) remain below, the Zachar
Malchut and the Nekeva Malchut. They are called YH since they
are Pshutim (pl. for Pashut), without filling.

--- PAGE 137 ---
This means that the Reshimot that remain from the Orot ZON after
their departure are the Behinot Malchut of the ZON. This is because a
Reshimo is considered Behinat Malchut of the Ohr that departed and
they are simple, without filling, meaning the measure of Aviut in the
Masach that extends the measure of the Koma. Since their measure of
Aviut has purified, the Orot departed, and this is why they are simple.
59. Yet, you should know that then the two Melachim are equal.
Although the Zachar is greater than the Nukva, still, now they are
equal since the Behinat Ohr Zachar is in the form of Histalkut, as
mentioned above. When these Orot wanted to depart in order to
make a Kli, these Orot remained in Keter Hochma Bina, as we have
said above, I wish to say the Reshimot.
It turns out, that the Ohr Zachar of the Keter is in the form of
Histalkut, the Ohr Nukva in the Keter is in the form of Panim, and
hence the Ohr Zachar and the Ohr Nekeva are equal this time.
Moreover, since the Zachar left itself outside, under the
Shorashim, the Zachar has a great craving to ascend once more,
which is not so in the Nukva.
Hence, almost all the Ohr Zachar rises upwards and only very
little Ohr remains. Yet, because the Nukva does not have a Shoresh
above like the Zachar in the Keter, she does not have such a
craving and desire to rise, and most of the Ohr remains in her Kli.
For that reason they cannot be equal, the two Malchuyot together,
Zachar and Nekeva. Yet when they return, the Zachar comes with
all its Ohr and also takes a great Ohr from the Shoresh of Keter
above it. Thus, when they return, the Nukva cannot receive the
entire Ohr of the Zachar, only the VAK.
60. In order to understand that, there is one thing you must know
first, and this is it: There is a difference between the first time in
Atzilut and the time that follows. The first time in all of them is
when the Ohr Zachar of Keter remains during the first Histalkut.
Afterwards, in Hitpashtut Bet, when the Hochma enters the Kli of
Keter, it does not enter the Kli of the Zachar, but only enters in the

--- PAGE 138 ---
Kli of the Nekeva itself, which is the Hey of the YH. Thus ZON are
in two Kelim.
However, in Histalkut Bet, when both ZON rose up and equalized
together, they all received He’arah from the Keter Elyon together.
Hence, when they come and return in their Kelim, both enter the
Kli of the Zachar and the Malchut of the Nukva remains in her Kli
of Hey ה.
Ohr Pnimi
60. There is a difference between the first time in Atzilut and the time
that follows.
It has been explained above that first the Ohr expanded in Matei ve Lo
Matei in ten exits and ten entrances of all ten Orot until it came to the
Malchut. After that it became Matei ve Lo Matei a second time,
perpetual. This means that every time the Hitpashtut reaches Malchut
it returns.
It has been explained that the first Behina, meaning the Matei ve Lo
Matei that reached the Malchut once, is called Partzuf Hochma de AK,
or AB de AK. The perpetual Matei ve Lo Matei that goes back and
forth is another Behina, called Partzuf Bina de AK, or SAG de AK.
He writes, “There is a difference between the first time in Atzilut,”
meaning the Matei ve Lo Matei once until it reaches Malchut. “The
time that follows” means the Matei ve Lo Matei after it reached the
Malchut in the first time, which is the perpetual Matei ve Lo Matei.
The first time in all of them etc. are in two Kelim etc.
It is so because these two Kelim of Zachar and Nekeva emerged right
at the time of the coming of the Ohr back to the Partzuf by the double
Haka’ot (pl. for Hakaa) of the Reshimo that remains in Keter to the
Ohr that comes to the Partzuf anew.
The Rav explains (Part 4, Chap 4, item 6) that a small Ohr does not
strike a bigger Ohr. Still, because there is merit in the Ohr Hochma
that comes anew from above unlike the Reshimo, whose Zivug and her

--- PAGE 139 ---
Ohr have already departed, the Hochma can strike the Reshimo and
educe Nitzotzin from her.
Yet, this reason is sufficient only for the Ohr Hochma. Because of its
coming anew from the Zivug above, it thus equalizes with the Reshimo
whose Zivug has already departed.
However, this is not enough for Partzuf Bina de AK since although
Ohr Bina came anew, its power is still not enough to strike the
Reshimo and educe Nitzotzin for the Kli. For that reason a Kli for the
Nekeva was not made here, but it is clothed in the Kli de Zachar that
remains of the previous Hitpashtut Bet.
Furthermore, the Rav has already written (Part 4, Chap 3, item 10)
that the whole reason for the beating of the Orot on each other is only
between two opposite and contradicting Orot in their nature. The
Reshimo de Keter prevents He’arat GAR because of the Achoraim de
Ohr Keter that stands at the Rosh (see Ohr Pnimi item 40, paragraph
“The Masach de Keter purified”). Also, the whole He’arah of Ohr
Hochma is only Behinat GAR, as it is written there.
Since they are divided in their nature, they beat on each other.
However, in Partzuf Bina, whose Reshimo remains from the Ohr
Hochma de Hitpashtut Bet and the Ohr that comes anew is the Ohr
Bina, it is known that Hochma and Bina are not in disparity of nature.
On the contrary, AVI stay as one (as the Rav says in item 39).
Hence, there is no Hakaa between the Reshimo and the Ohr Bina,
there are no Nitzotzin for new Kelim from the Nekeva, and for this
reason, the Nekeva clothes in Kli de Zachar. This does not contradict
what the Rav wrote above (item 3), that the Ohr Hochma clothed in
the bad Ohr de Reshimo de Keter and the Ohr of the Reshimo de Keter
inside Hochma. Thus, the Ohr Hochma and the Reshimo have only
one Kli, while here he says that they have two Kelim.
The thing is that they clothe each other like the particular degrees in
the Partzufim of Atzilut. This means that the Kli de Hochma clothes in
Kli de Keter, and the Ohr Av of the Reshimo clothes inside Kli de

--- PAGE 140 ---
Hochma. Ohr Hochma clothes inside the Ohr Av of the Reshimo and
the selected Ohr of the Reshimo clothes inside the Ohr Hochma.
In Histalkut Bet, when both ZON rose up etc. both enter the Kli of
the Zachar.
The Histalkut of the Matei ve Lo Matei of the first time is called
Histalkut Bet. This is because Partzuf Keter de AK is Hitpashtut
Aleph, and the Histalkut of Partzuf Keter is called Histalkut Aleph.
Partzuf Hochma de AK is Hitpashtut Bet and the Histalkut of Partzuf
Hochma is called Histalkut Bet.
As in the first Histalkut, the Rav explained above (item 6) that prior to
Hitpashtut Bet, the ZON de Keter rose up, being the Reshimo de
Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut and the Reshimo de Behina Gimel. There,
both received He’arah from the Keter Elyon.
Similarly, in the second Histalkut, prior to the Hitpashtut of Partzuf
Bina, the two Reshimot rose. These are the Reshimo de Behina Gimel
of Hitlabshut and the Reshimo de Behina Bet, which are Behinat ZON
de Keter de Partzuf Bina.
Both of them rose to the Malchut de Rosh and there received He’arah
from the Keter Elyon together. Through this He’arah, the Nekeva
acquired Hishtavut with the Zachar, and for that reason the Nekeva
could clothe the Kli of the Zachar.
61. This is always so after the first time since the ZON always remain
in the Kli Zachar and mate there together. It turns out that the
Yod, which is the Kli of the Zachar, were both ZON.
When they mate, the Nukva does not tolerate the Ohr Zachar,
except from its VAK. Two sons stem from the Zivug of these ZON
that were incorporated in the simple Ot Yod, following their
example. They are the VD (Vav Dalet) filling of Yod.
Ohr Pnimi
61. The Nukva does not tolerate the Ohr Zachar, except from its VAK.

--- PAGE 141 ---
This is because the Ohr Hochma remains in the Rosh under the
Malchut because its Achoraim is below and prevents He’arat GAR
from the Keter de Guf (Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “We must understand
that thing.”).
There it explains it regarding Partzuf Hochma, and the same applies in
Partzuf Bina as well. This is because there is one reason for both:
Since the Ohr that remains in the Rosh cannot expand to the Guf by
itself. Although its Reshimo shines in the Guf, such a He’arah is still
considered to be through the Achoraim, preventing He’arat GAR. This
is why he says, “the Nukva does not tolerate the Ohr Zachar, except
from its VAK.”
Two sons stem from the Zivug of these ZON that were
incorporated in the simple Ot Yod, following their example. They
are the VD (Vav Dalet) filling of Yod.
It means that as the ZON de Keter in the Partzuf Hochma de AK
emanated the ZON to Kli de Hochma of that Partzuf, so here the ZON
de Keter in Partzuf Bina educed the ZON to the Kli Hochma here,
through their Zivug together. The difference is in the measure of the
Koma, since in Partzuf Hochma the ZON de Kli de Hochma are
regarded as YH (see the Rav’s words item 53).
Here, however, there is only Behinat Ohr Bina even in ZON de Keter.
Hence there is no longer Behinat GAR in the ZON de Hochma that
were emanated by their Zivug, but Behinat VAK de GAR. This is
because it is similar to the ZON de Kli de Bina, emanated from the
ZON de Hochma in Partzuf Hochma de AK.
It is so because the Komat ZON de Keter of Partzuf Bina is equal to
the Komat ZON de Hochma in Partzuf Hochma de AK (see Ohr Pnimi
item 47, par. “Now we shall explain”). For that reason the Zachar in
Kli de Hochma here is not called Yod, but Vav, since the VAK is always
called Vav. He writes that they are VD in filling of Yod, like the ZON
in Bina de Partzuf Hochma.
62. The thing is that since the Zachar does not mate in the Nukva,
only in the form of its VAK, its son is in the shape of Vav as well.

--- PAGE 142 ---
Yet, the Nukva is the shape of Dalet, since she has all the Yod
Kelim, except her Ohr VAK is annulled in her first four, hence the
name Dalet. Thus, the filling of Yod, which is VD, and all this, is
called Yod, which are ZON.
Afterwards she is the Ot Hey of the YH, which is the Kli of the
Nukva, and Malchut of the Nukva remains there. When the four
lower Orot rise in this Ot Hey, it is filled with the Ot Yod, and
becomes Hey ה, though the shape of this Hey is such as this VD,
hence it is ten.
Ohr Pnimi
62. The Zachar does not mate in the Nukva, only in the form of its
VAK etc. is in the shape of Vav etc. the Nukva is the shape of Dalet.
This is so because the Zachar extends from a Zachar which is Behinat
Ohr Hochma. However, since it does not mate for these ZON, but
from the Behinat VAK in it, the Zachar has only VAK de Hochma. For
this reason it is called Vav ו.
The Nekeva extends from the Nukva de Kli de Keter, which is the
Komat Bina. It is called Dalet ד because although it has GAR, its VAK
are contained in the GAR.
Thus, the filling of Yod, which is VD.
This explains the matter of the ascents of the Orot of Partzuf Bina. It
states that if five Orot ascend, they all ascend to the Zachar. It has
been explained that the reason is that the ZON in this Partzuf have
only one Kli, which is a Kli de Zachar, called Yod י.
It has also been explained that all those five Orot that rose to Kli de
Keter are incorporated in the Orot Elyonim, which are ZON de
Hochma, called Vav ו Dalet ד. We have also learned that this is the
meaning of the VD in filling of your, since when they rise to the Kli de
Zachar, called Yod, and the ascending Orot are called VD, the Zivug
returns to the Partzuf.
This is the deduction that he wanted to teach to us in this study. Below
he will also bring the ascents of Partzuf Hochma to the Kli de Nukva

--- PAGE 143 ---
of the Keter.
When the four lower Orot rise in this Ot Hey, it is filled with the Ot
Yod.
This refers to the conclusion from the second division, when four Orot
ascend, meaning in Partzuf Hochma, when they rise to the Nukva de
Kli de Keter.
It has been explained that the Kli of the Nukva de Keter is called Hey
ה and the Orot that ascend to it are its filling, since they return the
Zivug Elyon to her.
This explains why these four Orot are called Yod, named after the
highest Sefira in these Orot, which is the Behinat Zachar of the Kli de
Hochma (being Behina Gimel and Ohr Hochma, extending to ZON de
Hochma through a He’arah from ZON de Keter). It is called Yod, and
all the Orot incorporate in it. Hence, this ה is filled with the Ot Yod י
and becomes HY.
The Rav speaks above (item 55) of three divisions regarding the
ascents of the Orot and their incorporation in ZON de Keter: The first,
when they rise and incorporate in the Nukva de Keter, the second,
when they incorporate in the Dechura de Keter, and the third is when
some incorporate in the Nukva, and some in the Dechura. Only the
first two divisions have been explained here, and he did not explain to
us the third division at all.
However, he has already explained that third division to us (item 7), as
that is where he began to talk of these three kinds of Hitkalelut. He
mentions three general kinds there:
1. When the ZON incorporate in one another in one Kli.
2. When their He’arot mingle in one another when they are in two
Kelim.
3. When they incorporate in one another when they are two Orot without
Kelim.
The meaning of the words is as written above.

--- PAGE 144 ---
The first incorporation is that the ZON are incorporated in one Kli,
meaning in Partzuf Bina de AK, where there is no Hakaa of Reshimo
and the Ohr Bina on each other. For this reason the Kli for the Nekeva
de Keter did not emerge. Thus, the Nekeva clothes in the Kli de
Zachar.
The second incorporation is that the ZON have two Kelim. It is in
Partzuf Hochma de AK where there is Hakaa of the Reshimo and the
Ohr Hochma on each other. Two Kelim emerge, one for the Zachar
and one for the Nekeva.
The third incorporation is when Lo Matei in Keter, and the ZON
themselves rise to the Malchut of the Rosh. At that time they expand
and exit their Kelim de Guf. They are two Orot without Kelim.
The Rav did not explain the first two incorporations at all because he
relied himself on what has been elaborately explained here, because
these are the first two incorporations that have been thoroughly
explained before us. The third division is what he did not explain here,
being the third incorporation there, which the Rav explained
extensively above.
He explains there that the ZON that rose to the Rosh have two Zivugim
there: the first Zivug is when the Nekeva is incorporated in the Zachar.
That Zivug comes out on Aviut of Behina Dalet, at the measure of the
Zachar. At that time they extend the Ohr in Komat Keter Elyon.
The second Zivug is when the Zachar is incorporated in the Nekeva
and the Zivug comes out on the measure of Aviut of the Nekeva,
meaning Behina Gimel. Then the Ohr is extended only at the level of
Komat Hochma (see there and in Ohr Pnimi item 9).
It has been explained there (Ohr Pnimi item 6) that in this ascent of
the ZON to the Rosh, all the Sefirot below Keter are also included.
However, they are all annulled in the ZON de Keter, hence they do not
merit a name.
Here, all five Orot in the Partzuf rose, and the Ohr Hesed, which
contains the ZAT, was included in these ZON. At that time all five

--- PAGE 145 ---
Orot are somewhat incorporated in the Kli de Nekeva, and somewhat
incorporated in the Kli de Zachar.
In other words, when the Nekeva incorporates in the Zachar and the
Zivug is made in the Behinat Zachar, the five Orot are incorporated in
the Zachar. In the second Zivug, when the Zachar is incorporated in
the Nekeva and the Zivug is made in Behinat Nekeva, the five Orot are
also contained in the Nekeva. Thus, the five Orot are somewhat
incorporated in the Zachar, by the first Zivug, and somewhat in the
Nekeva, by the second Zivug.
The shape of this Hey is such as this VD, hence it is ten.
This is because there is a Hey ה whose shape is Vav ו Dalet ד, and
there is a Hey ה whose shape is Yod י Dalet ד. He says that the Hey
that implies the Nekeva de Keter has a shape of ו ד, which is ten in
Gimatria, indicating that this Hey has ten Kelim. It means that all Eser
Sefirot of the Koma are contained in the Hey, as he has written above
that the entire new Koma that came out in Hitpashtut Bet, which is the
Komat Hochma, is the Behinat Ohr Nekeva de Keter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 146 ---
A E
DDITIONAL XPLANATION ABOUT THE
M I
ATTER OF THE NVERSION OF THE
P M O
ANIM AND THE AKING RDER OF THE
K
ELIM
Brought here from item 15 to item 20 in the Rav’s words
Although matters are clear enough in their place in Ohr Pnimi, I still
find that the readers become confused. It is hard for them to arrange
the matters and understand the Rav’s words there.
It is so because here we must remember the matters of the Histalkut of
the Ohr, and the matter of the Hizdakchut of the Masach separately, as
well as the separate matter of the inversion of the Panim de Kelim. On
top of that, we must remember the picture of the Kelim, each of them
in itself.
The making of the Kelim is done only after the Histalkut of the last
Ohr from the Kli, as the Rav says in item 27. He says: “Know, that all
these Kelim did not gain Aviut and become Kelim only after the
Histalkut of Ohr Malchut. At that time He turned His Panim from the
Kli.” Thus, the matter of the inversion of the Panim de Kelim begins
in each and every Kli from the time of the Histalkut Ohr Malchut from
it.
You already know the attribute of the Kelim, that each and everyone
must have a Behinat Aviut that is adequate to its Komat Ohr as the Kli
is only named after the highest Sefira in its Koma. If the highest Sefira
is Hochma, it is called merely a Kli of Hochma, though all the Sefirot
below Hochma are necessarily there. Similarly, if the highest Sefira is
Keter, it is only called Kli de Keter, etc. similarly.

--- PAGE 147 ---
You also know the measure of the Aviut in each Kli necessary for the
measure of its Koma. The Kli de Keter, in which there is Komat
Yechida, must be in a Kli of Aviut de Behina Dalet. If the Masach on
the Aviut de Behina Dalet in the Kli purifies, the entire Ohr Keter
immediately disappears from there, as it is only Ohr Yechida.
However, it contains all the Orot below this Ohr.
Moreover, had the Kli itself been lacking this Aviut de Behina Dalet, it
would not have been qualified to receive the Masach de Behina Dalet
at all. Thus, it is certain that it is not at all Kli de Keter that is arranged
only according to the Aviut in it.
It is likewise in all the Kelim, and this is simple since there is the
Behinat Aviut in the Kli itself, at which time we are talking about the
Masach. However, if the Kli itself is missing, the Masach will not be
able to complete it, since Masach means a detainment on a certain
measure of Aviut in the Kli.
You also know that the matter of the Aviut in the Kli and the matter of
the Hitlabshut of the Ohr, are two opposites. For example, Kli de
Malchut has Aviut de Behina Dalet. Yet, it is unfit to clothe the Komat
Yechida for that, since she lacks the Behinat Hitlabshut of that Koma,
which is Kli Keter.
It follows, that the distinction between the Kli de Keter and the Kli de
Malchut is in that the Kli de Keter has Behina Dalet de Hamshacha, as
well as Behinat Keter de Hitlabshut. Conversely, the Kli Malchut has
only Behina Dalet de Hamshacha, but is devoid of Behina Dalet de
Hitlabshut, meaning Behinat Kli Keter.
Similarly, the difference between Kli de Hochma and Kli de ZA is that
Kli de Hochma has Behina Gimel de Hamshacha, and also Kli de
Hochma, being Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut. However, Kli ZA has
only Behina Gimel de Hamshacha, and only Kli de ZA from Behinat
Hitlabshut. It is fit to clothe only Komat Ruach, which is the Koma de
Behina Aleph, lacking the Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut.
Now you understand that when the Ohr departs from Malchut because
the Masach de Behina Dalet purified, and Malchut rises to ZA, in fact,

--- PAGE 148 ---
only the Ohr Yechida departed from the Partzuf, from the Kli of Keter.
This is because now it lacks the Behinat Hamshacha.
However, the Ohr Malchut did not leave at all, since it rose to Kli de
ZA. Nonetheless, by that only Kli de Malchut was made, not the Kli de
Keter.
This is so because Kli Malchut remained entirely without Ohr.
However, Kli de Keter still has Ohr. Although it is Ohr Hochma,
which is much lower than its Behina, it is not considered sufficient
Histalkut to turn its Panim downward.
It will make a Kli only after Ohr Malchut departs from the Kli de
Keter too, as the Rav says above. Hence Malchut alone becomes a Kli
since she is completely without Ohr.
Also, when, for example, Ohr Malchut departed from ZA and rose to
Bina, the Kli de ZA turned its Panim downward even though the Ohr
ZA has not yet departed, since it rose to Bina, but the Ohr Hochma has
now departed from the Kli Hochma. Nevertheless, Hochma did not
become a Kli, only ZA was made into a Kli since only ZA has now
been left without Ohr, while in Kli Hochma there is still Ohr Bina
there etc. similarly.
It therefore follows, that after all the Orot have departed from the
Partzuf, all the Kelim remained Panim de Tachton in Achor de Elyon,
except the Kelim de Keter and Hochma, which remained Panim be
Panim. It is so because then all the Kelim returned their Panim as in
the beginning and the Panim de Kli Malchut, which is Behina Dalet,
are found opposite the Achor de Kli ZA, which is Behina Bet.
Also, the Panim de Kli ZA, which is Behina Gimel is opposite the
Achor de Kli de Bina, which is Behina Aleph. The Panim de Bina,
which is Behina Bet is opposite the Achor de Hochma, which is
Behina Bet too, but the Keter keeps its Panim below since it cannot
return its Panim as in the beginning since the Reshimo de Behina
Dalet disappeared.

--- PAGE 149 ---
For this reason it remained in Behina Gimel below, opposite Hochma,
whose Panim is also Behina Gimel. Thus, Keter and Hochma are
found to be Panim be Panim.
We must also understand that the matter of the measurements of Koma
that extend according to the Aviut in the Masach, are arranged
according to the measure of the Hitlabshut of the Sefirot de Ohr
Yashar.
For example, when it states Komat ZA, it refers to the measure of Ohr
that Behina Gimel de Ohr Yashar, named ZA, can receive inside it,
which are two Orot, Ruach Nefesh. Also, when it talks about Komat
Behina Bet, meaning the measure of Hitlabshut in Behina Bet de Ohr
Yashar. Also, Komat Hochma is as the measure of the Hitlabshut of
Hochma de Ohr Yashar etc. similarly.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 150 ---
T Q T
ABLE OF UESTIONS FOR OPICS
43. What is YH in Keter, HaVaYaH in the rest of the Partzufim?
44. Why do the four Otiot HaVaYaH imply discernments of lacks?
45. What do the YV de HaVaYaH imply?
46. What do the Hey Hey de HaVaYaH imply?
47. Why are the Shorashim of the Sefirot in Malchut of the Rosh?
48. Where does the Ohr Keter that did not expand to the Guf stand?
49. What is the function of the Ohr Keter that did not return to the
Guf?
50. Why must the Kelim de Guf receive the Orot through the Ohr
Keter?
51. What is the meaning of the location of the Ohr Keter under
Malchut de Rosh?
52. What is the inversion of the Panim de Ohr Keter to the Shorashim
and its Achoraim to the Anafim?
53. What is the sufficient Yenika of the Orot?
54. What is sufficient He’arah to generate offspring?
55. What causes the Ohr Keter to return its Panim to the Anafim?
56. What causes the Ohr Keter to return its Achoraim to the Anafim?
57. How will the Sefirot de Guf generate changes in the Rosh?
58. What are ZON de Keter de Hitpashtut Bet?
59. What causes ZON to rise to Malchut of the Rosh?
60. What is a sufficient reception for ZON from the He’arat Rosh?

--- PAGE 151 ---
61. What is the result of the ascent of ZON to the Malchut of the
Rosh?
62. Why are all the Eser Sefirot of Histalkut Aleph that rose to the
Rosh called ZON de Keter?
63. How do the Reshimo de Keter connect with the Reshimo de
Hochma into Behinat ZON of a single degree?
64. What is the place of ZON de Keter when they ascend in the Rosh?
65. Who causes the ascent of the Malchut of the Rosh to Yesod de
Rosh?
66. What does preparation of the Tachtonim to receive mean?
67. What are the three kinds of Generality?
68. Why are the Reshimo de Keter and Reshimo de Nekeva called
Zachar and Nekeva?
69. What are the Behinot of the Orot de ZON de Keter of Hitpashtut
Bet?
70. How do the three Orot, Ohr Keter and Zachar and Nekeva de Keter
stand at the Malchut of the Rosh?
71. How many Zivugim are there to the ZON de Keter in the Rosh?
72. How is the He’arat Keter Elyon extended by the ZON that rose to
the Rosh?
73. How is it possible that Malchut de Rosh would rise to Behina
Gimel and the Orot would not change their places?
74. When are the ZON together in the Yesod de Rosh?
75. What is the Hitkalelut of the Nekeva in the Zachar?
76. What causes the descent of the degrees?
77. Why does the He’arat Keter Elyon de Zivug Aleph of the Rosh not
extend to the Guf?
78. What makes Ohr Keter exit Malchut of the Rosh?
79. What caused the Zachar de Keter mingle with the Nekeva in Zivug
Bet?

--- PAGE 152 ---
80. What does the Hitkalelut of ZON de Keter do in the two Zivugim of
the Rosh?
81. How were ZON de Kli de Keter emanated?
82. How were ZON de Kli de Hochma emanated?
83. How were ZON de Kli de Bina emanated?
84. How many Zivugim are there in ZON de Keter, in ZON de Hochma
and in ZON de Bina when they rise in Malchut of the Rosh?
85. What is the difference between ZON de Keter de AB de AK and
ZON de Keter de SAG de AK?
86. What is the difference between ZON de Hochma de AB de AK
and ZON de Hochma de SAG de AK?
87. What is the difference between ZON de Bina de AB de AK and
ZON de Bina de SAG de AK?
88. What is the difference between the Five Ktzavot de AB and the
Five Ktzavot de SAG?
89. What are the five Orot in the two Kelim?
90. When is the name YH in Keter Pashut and when is it with a filling?
91. When do four Orot ascend and when do five Orot ascend to the
Keter?
92. What is the filling in the YH de Keter when four Orot rise to
Keter?
93. What is the meaning of the Otiot of the filling?
94. What are the fillings of Yodin, Heyin, and Alephin?
95. What is the meaning of YH without a filling?
96. When do ZON de Keter equalize with each other and when is the
Zachar greater than the Nekeva?
97. When are ZON de Keter in two Kelim and when are they in one
Kli?
98. Why are ZON de SAG de AK in one Kli?
99. How does the Nekeva de Keter receive from Keter Elyon?

--- PAGE 153 ---
100. Why does the Nekeva de Partzuf SAG de AK receive only VAK of
the Zachar?
101. Why is ZON de Hochma of SAG de AK called VH and not YH?
102. When do the Orot ascend and incorporate in the Zachar de Keter
and when do the Orot ascend and incorporate in the Nekeva de
Keter?
103. When do the Orot ascend, some in the Nekeva and some in the
Zachar of Keter?
104. Why was the ascent of MAN not caused in Hitpashtut Aleph, when
HB rose to Keter, as in the ascent of HB to Keter in Hitpashtut Bet?
105. What is raising MAN?
106. Why did all the Orot ascend to MAN to Keter in all the exits and
the Lo Matei of Hitpashtut Bet, and not to Rosh, as in Hitpashtut
Aleph?
107. What are the first Kelim de Akudim?
108. What causes annulment of the Kelim?
109. Where did the Kelim for the Partzuf of Hitpashtut Bet come from?
110. Where did the Kelim for Partzuf SAG de AK come from?
111. Why do ZON de AB have two Kelim and ZON de SAG only one
Kli?
112. Why did all the Orot come to Kli de Keter together in Hitpashtut
Bet?
113. What are Panim and Achor de Kelim?
114. Why are the Kelim de Hitpashtut Bet arrnged one below the other?
115. What are the Panim and Achor de KHB?
116. Why are there no Kelim in the Partzuf due to the Hitpashtut Bet of
itself?
117. What is the difference between Hitpashtut Aleph and Hitpashtut
Bet?
118. How are the Kelim de GAR made?

--- PAGE 154 ---
119. What are the causes of the completion of the Kelim de GAR?
120. What are the parts in the Kli that are worthy of looking into the
Ohr even during the Histalkut?
121. What causes the Kli to turn its Panim downward and its Achoraim
upward?
122. What causes the Kli to turn its Panim to its place as in the
beginning?
123. What is Histaklut in the Ohr Elyon through the Achor?
124. How will the Orot be extended from Keter to Hochma when they
are so far from each other?
125. What two kinds of inversions of the Panim are implemented in the
degrees?
126. What causes the division of the Sefirot Hochma and Bina?
127. Why do all the Sefirot remain in Panim and Achor after Histalkut
Aleph?
128. Why did Keter and Hochma remain Panim be Panim after
Histalkut Aleph?
129. Why is Keter Achor be Achor with the Ohr Elyon?
130. What is the meaning of a Moment in spirituality?
131. When is the Kli Malchut completed in Histalkut Aleph?
132. When is Kli ZA completed in Histalkut Aleph?
133. Why is any less than three is considered filled?
134. Why is the ascent of ZA to Bina not considered remoteness of
degree?
135. When was there Lo Matei in Keter for the first time?
136. Why is Histalkut Aleph called Lo Matei in Keter?
137. Who causes the Lo Matei in Hitpashtut Bet every time?
138. Why were the Matei ve Lo Matei made into ten Orot and were not
made into ten Kelim?

--- PAGE 155 ---
139. Why is the permanent Matei ve Lo Matei compared to a flame
swaying here and there?
140. What is the ratio between ZON de Hochma and ZON de Bina?
141. How is Hesed emanated?
142. What is Behinat Kli de Hesed?
143. What is Behinat Ohr de Hesed?
144. What is the order of the emanation of the Ohr of Gevura?
145. What is the property of Sefirat Gevura?
146. What is the difference between ZON de Bina and Sefirat Gevura?
147. What is the order of the emanation of the Ohr Tifferet?
148. What is the property of the Kli de Tifferet?
149. How is the Ohr Hesed different when it is in Bina from when it is
in Tifferet?
150. What is Ohr Daat at its Shoresh?
151. What is the essence of Behinat ZA in the Hey Ktzavot?
152. What are the Behinot RTS in ZAT?
153. What is the difference between Hesed and Gevura, and Tifferet?
154. Why is the essence of Ohr Hesed not clothed in the Sefirot of
Hochma and Gevura?
155. How is Sefirat Netzah emanated?
156. What is the attribute of Sefirat Netzah?
157. What is the difference between HGT and NHY?
158. What is the attribute of the Kli de Hod?
159. What is Sefirat Yesod?
160. In which Sefira did Ohr Malchut clothe?
161. What is the Ohr that clothed in Kli Malchut?
162. What is the ratio between ZON de Hochma and ZON de Bina?
163. How many Behinot ZON are there in Hitpashtut Bet?

--- PAGE 156 ---
164. What is the attribute of the four ZON couples of Hitpashtut Bet?
165. In which Behina did the Zivug stop and the Ohr of Hitpashtut Bet
depart entirely?
166. What is the second Behina of Hitpashtut Bet?
167. How was Partzuf SAG de AK emanated?
168. What are the ZON of Kelim de KHB?
169. What are the names of ZON de KHB?
170. What are the Otiot that designate ZON and the Kelim of KHB?
171. How many Behinot are there in Hitpashtut Bet?
172. What is the meaning of Only He’arah, without giving Orot?
173. Why did Hochma illuminate the Vav to Bina before the giving of
the Orot?
174. Why did Keter not give the Yod to Hochma from Behinat He’arah?
175. When does Hesed need its mother and when does it not?
176. Why does Bina rise to Hochma before it gives the Ohr Hesed to Kli
de Hesed?
177. How did the Hey de Zivug ZON of Bina reach the Kli Malchut?
178. What is the difference between the Ohr Hesed and the Hey from
Zivug ZON de Bina?
179. How is the Hey separated into two separated degrees?
180. Why can’t the Ohr Hesed be a Zachar to Bina?
181. Why can’t the Ohr Hesed be a Nekeva to Bina?
182. Which Ohr descended to complement the Malchut?
183. What are the ZON in Yesod?
184. How did the Reshimo de Kli de Bina, which is GAR, become a
Nekeva to the Yod that was born from the Zivug ZON de Hochma,
which is VAK?
185. What are the five Hassadim and five Gevurot in the five Ktzavot?
186. What are the five Hassadim and five Gevurot in Yesod?

--- PAGE 157 ---
187. What is Matei in Keter de Hitpashtut Bet?
188. Why is it that when Matei in Keter, Lo Matei in Hochma and Bina?
189. Why is it that when Matei in Hochma, Lo Matei in Bina?
190. Why is it that when Matei in Bina, Lo Matei in Hesed?
191. What is Matei in Hesed and in Tifferet?
192. What is Matei in Keter Partzuf SAG de AK?
193. What is Matei in Hochma de SAG de AK?
194. What is Matei in Bina de SAG de AK?
195. What is Matei in Hesed de SAG de AK?
196. What is Matei in Hod and not Matei in Yesod de SAG de AK?
197. Why is it that when Matei in Keter, Gevura, Netzah, and Yesod, Lo
Matei Hochma, Bina and Hesed, Tifferet, Hod, and Malchut de
SAG de AK?
198. Why is it that when Matei in Hochma, Bina, and Hesed, Tifferet,
Hod, and Malchut, Lo Matei in Keter, Gevura, Netzah, and Yesod de
SAG de AK?
199. Why is it that when Matei in Malchut de SAG de AK, it returns to
being Matei in Keter, and so on and so forth?
200. Why does the Masach de Behina Bet rely on the Achoraim de
Bina?
201. Why are the Eser Sefirot de Rosh always called GAR, and the Eser
Sefirot de Guf named “The Seven Lower Sefirot”?
202. Why is every Partzuf Tachton considered Behinat VAK with
respect to its Elyon?

--- PAGE 158 ---
43. What is YH in Keter, HaVaYaH in the rest of the Partzufim?
The Hitpashtut and Histalkut that were in Partzuf Keter de AK is
called YH. Hitpashtut Bet and Histalkut Bet that were in Partzuf AB de
AK is called VH.
The YH in Hitpashtut Aleph are also contained in Hitpashtut Bet since
all the forces in the Elyon are necessarily present in the Tachton as
well. You find, that YH is in the Keter, meaning in Partzuf Keter de
AK, and HaVaYaH in the rest of the Partzufim.
(Item 23, and Ohr Pnimi par. “He writes”)
44. Why do the four Otiot HaVaYaH imply discernments of lacks?
The Otiot are Kelim. It is known that the Histalkut of the Ohr and its
absence cause the making of the Kli. Hence it is necessary that in each
Ot of the four Otiot HaVaYaH there is some Behina of lack of Ohr.
This is the cause for the making of that Ot, meaning that Kli, and for
this reason the Otiot are Behinot lackes.
(Ohr Pnimi Item 24)
45. What do the YV de HaVaYaH imply?
The Yod implies the Hitpashtut Ohr of the Nekudot de Partzuf Keter,
which are the Komot that came out there from Hochma down. Vav
implies the Hitpashtut Ohr of the Nekudot of Partzuf AB de AK,
meaning from Hochma down of this Partzuf too.
However, there is no sign for the Hitpashtut of Komat Keter in the
four Otiot HaVaYaH, neither for Keter de Partzuf Keter, nor for Keter
de Partzuf AB. It is so because there is no discernment of a lack there,
for which the Otiot would be written (see answer 44).
(Item 24)
46. What do the Hey Hey de HaVaYaH imply?
The First Hey implies the general Histalkut de Hitpashtut Aleph, and
the last Hey implies the general Histalkut de Hitpashtut Bet.
(There, and Ohr Pnimi)

--- PAGE 159 ---
47. Why are the Shorashim of the Sefirot in Malchut of the Rosh?
Because the whole matter of the vessels of reception, called Guf, are
because of the Ohr Hozer that Malchut raises in her Hakaa on the Ohr
Elyon from her and above in the Eser Sefirot de Rosh. Through this
Ohr Hozer, Malchut acquires strength to expand from her and within
her from above downward to Eser Sefirot de Hitlabshut, called Guf.
It means that the entire amount that the Ohr Hozer clothed in the Eser
Sefirot de Rosh from below upward themselves invert and clothe the
Eser Sefirot of the Guf. Thus, Eser Sefirot de Guf are Anafim (lit.
Branches) of the Malchut de Rosh.
(Item 1)
48. Where does the Ohr Keter that did not expand to the Guf stand?
It stands under Malchut of the Rosh, meaning under its Shoresh.
(There)
49. What is the function of the Ohr Keter that did not return to the
Guf?
It gives to its Anaf (lit. Branch) that stands at the Kli de Keter de Guf,
which is the Behinat Zachar of Keter. It also detains the He’arat GAR
from expanding to the Partzuf.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40 par. “We must understand”)
50. Why must the Kelim de Guf receive the Orot through the Ohr
Keter?
Because although the Orot departed from the Guf, they still receive
enough Ohr to sustain them. They receive this He’arah through the
Keter that departed from them and rose under Malchut de Rosh, since
it is the Shoresh for every Eser Sefirot de Guf, as the Ohr Keter
always contains all the Eser Sefirot that expand through it.
(Item 3, and Ohr Pnimi there)
51. What is the meaning of the location of the Ohr Keter under
Malchut de Rosh?

--- PAGE 160 ---
It indicates that it is an Ohr without a Kli, hence it cannot expand from
above downward to the Guf. Its being under the Malchut de Rosh and
above the Kelim de Guf indicates that it is a middle, an intermediate
between Behinat Rosh and Behinat Guf, shining from its place to the
Guf through its Reshimo that stands at Keter de Guf.
(There)
52. What is the inversion of the Panim de Ohr Keter to the Shorashim
and its Achoraim to the Anafim?
It causes its Anafim in the Guf, which are ZON in Kli de Keter that
receive its He’arah, to not be able to bestow that great Ohr that they
receive from it to the Tachtonim from Keter de Guf. This is so because
Achoraim de Ohr Keter are Behinat detainment and cessation on its
He’arah so as not to expand from Kli de Keter de Guf downward.
(Items 4 and 5)
53. What is the sufficient Yenika of the Orot?
It is a sufficient He’arah to descend below to Hitlabshut in the Guf to
mate and generate offspring.
(Item 3)
54. What is sufficient He’arah to generate offspring?
Through two Zivugim that are induced in Malchut, ZON acquire the
force to descend downward to Hitlabshut in the Guf and generate
offspring.
(Ohr Pnimi item 3, Sub Header “The Keter”)
55. What causes the Ohr Keter to return its Panim to the Anafim?
Through the ascents of the Zachar de Keter, namely Behina Dalet de
Hitlabshut, with the Nekeva de Keter, namely Behina Gimel in
complete Aviut both from Hamshacha and from Hitlabshut, these ZON
incorporate in one another in a common Aviut.
At that time the Zachar attains both from Behinat Hamshacha and
these common MAN themselves cause a Behinat Zivug Elyon in
Malchut of the Rosh and the Koma that comes out of this Zivug attains

--- PAGE 161 ---
up to Keter de Rosh. Also, the Ohr Keter in Malchut receives this
great Ohr and administers it to its Anafim, which are ZON. This is
considered that it returned its Panim to its Anafim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 9, par. “Thus, Malchut de Rosh”)
56. What causes the Ohr Keter to return its Achoraim to the Anafim?
The ascents of ZON to the Rosh mean that the Aviut in them purified
and their Tzura equalized with Behinat Malchut de Rosh. This causes
the Zivug in Malchut de Rosh, extending the Ohr from Keter Elyon
(see answer 55).
At that time the Ohr Keter returns its Panim to the Anafim and
dispenses them the Ohr de Keter Elyon. However, after the second
Zivug, when ZON have already sucked enough to descend to the Guf
for Hitlabshut in the Kelim, the Orot de ZON are found to be returning
and thickening in the Aviut de Guf.
At that time they cause that Behinat intermediate Aviut (mentioned in
answer 51) that exists in the Ohr Keter. This is its Behinat Achoraim,
preventing its He’arah from the Guf since it lacks the Behina Dalet de
Hamshacha. For this reason no vessel of reception extends from the
first Zivug, and this lack of vessels of reception is in itself its Behinat
Achoraim to the Anafim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 10)
57. How will the Sefirot de Guf generate changes in the Rosh?
These changes and operations that the Behinot Guf cause to be
renewed in the Eser Sefirot of the Rosh, do not refer to the very
essence of the Eser Sefirot de Rosh, but only to the Malchut and the
Masach in it. This is according to the Ohr Hozer that she raises up
from below upward.
For this reason Malchut is considered the Shoresh of all the Kelim and
the Orot in them and all the incidents in the Eser Sefirot de Guf.
Hence, when her Anafim acquire equivalence of form with her, they
instantly return to her, as a branch that returns to its root.

--- PAGE 162 ---
Through this return, the branches are renewed and they cause Behinat
renewed Aviut in the Masach in Malchut. The Ohr Elyon, which does
not stop for a moment mates on the new form of Aviut that the Masach
attained by the Hitkalelut of the Anafim in it. At that time a Koma of
new Eser Sefirot comes out “in potential”, appearing “de facto” from
there to the Guf.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6, Sub Header “They”)
58. What are ZON de Keter de Hitpashtut Bet?
The Zachar de Keter de Keter is the Behinat Reshimo de Kli de Keter
de Hitpashtut Aleph that was renewed in the Zivug Elyon of the Rosh.
The Nekeva is the actual Ohr of Komat Hochma that came out through
a Zivug de Ohr Elyon on Aviut de Behina Gimel from Malchut de
Rosh upward, which turned over and descended to the Guf from
Malchut down.
(Item 9, and Ohr Pnimi, Sub Header “This extends”)
59. What causes ZON to rise to Malchut of the Rosh?
The Hizdakchut Masach in Tabur de Hitpashtut Aleph until it became
Zach in equal form to the Masach de Malchut de Rosh is considered
that the Masach of Tabur rose to the Rosh. As it ascends, in the order
of degrees of the Eser Sefirot de Guf, the Masach is incorporated with
all the Reshimot in the Guf.
The two Reshimot de Zachar and Nekeva de Keter are the Upper ones
among them, containing all of them, hence when this Masach rose to
the Rosh, it brought these Reshimot along with it, meaning ZON de
Keter. Thus, the Hizdakchut of the Masach de Hitpashtut Aleph
caused ZON de Keter to ascend upward to the Rosh.
(Ohr Pnimi item 4, Sub Header “Rise”)
60. What is a sufficient reception for ZON from the He’arat Rosh?
After the two Zivugim of ZON in the first Zivug ended, which was the
Hitkalelut of the Nekeva in the Zachar, they extended the Ohr from
the Keter Elyon. However, they still did not have the strength to turn
over and expand downward to the Guf.

--- PAGE 163 ---
This is so because the Aviut de Behina Dalet of the Zachar was
lacking the Behinat Hamshacha of Behina Dalet since Malchut did
not leave a Reshimo. That Aviut de Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut was
sufficient to make a Zivug de Rosh by joining with the Reshimo de
Behina Gimel. However, she was still not enough to make a Behinat
vessel of reception for Hitlabshut in the Guf through this Ohr Hozer.
Hence, the ZON could not descend to the Guf until a second Zivug was
made, where there was a Hitkalelut of the Zachar in the Nekeva, and
the Zivug came out on Behina Gimel, which has Behinat Hamshacha
as well. At that time Malchut de Rosh could expand from her and
within her to Eser Sefirot de Guf through the Chazeh and the ZON
could come down.
(Ohr Pnimi item 4, Sub Header “Once”)
61. What is the result of the ascent of ZON to the Malchut of the
Rosh?
ZON’s ascent upwards was caused by the making of a Zivug on Behina
Gimel. That, in turn, lowered only Komat Hochma to the Guf and Ohr
Keter remained in the Rosh.
Thus, the degrees descended because the Ohr Hochma clothed in Kli
de Keter and the Ohr Bina in Kli de Hochma etc. It therefore follows
that each and every Kli remained lacking much of that measure of Ohr
that it had in Hitpashtut Aleph.
For this reason the Aviut in the Kelim had been recognized and they
were completed in a way that they will not be cancelled by the Ohr
clothing in them. It follows that the ascents of ZON caused the
completion of the Kelim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 5, Sub Header “It was”)
62. Why are all the Eser Sefirot of Histalkut Aleph that rose to the
Rosh called ZON de Keter?
This is because the Upper Sefira contains all the Sefirot below it.
Hence, the Reshimo de Behina Dalet contains all the Reshimot below
her, but because she lacks Behinat Hamshacha, she must therefore

--- PAGE 164 ---
join with the Behina Gimel. Hence, Behina Gimel too merits a name,
and they are all named after the two Reshimot, which are ZON de Kli
de Keter.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6, par. “Know, that the essence”)
63. How do the Reshimo de Keter connect with the Reshimo de
Hochma into Behinat ZON of a single degree?
The Reshimo de Behina Dalet, which is the Zachar de Keter, is only
half a Reshimo, its weaker half, which is only Behinat Hitlabshut.
However, the Reshimo de Behina Gimel is complete with two Behinot
Aviut: Hitlabshut and Hamshacha. The Zachar becomes needy of the
Nekeva, to the extent that there is Hishtavut between them, and they
become ZON of a single degree.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6, par. “You should know”)
64. What is the place of ZON de Keter when they ascend in the Rosh?
Under the root Ohr Keter that stands under Malchut of the Rosh, since
the ZON are the Anafim of that Ohr Keter.
(Item 9, and Ohr Pnimi par. “Remember these three names”)
65. Who causes the ascent of the Malchut of the Rosh to Yesod de
Rosh?
The coming of Behina Gimel, which is the Nekeva de Kli de Keter to
the place of Malchut de Rosh. It causes a corresponding ascent of
Malchut de Rosh to Yesod de Rosh, being Behina Gimel de Rosh.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6, Sub Header “They remain”)
66. What does preparation of the Tachtonim to receive mean?
See answer to question No. 13.
67. What are the three kinds of Generality?
• The first is the Hitkalelut of the Orot ZON when whey are without
Kelim, meaning when they ascend to the Rosh. At that time they
have both purified and acquired the form of Malchut de Rosh,
which is not considered an actual Kli, where ZON are
incorporated in one another in two Zivugim.

--- PAGE 165 ---
• The second is when they are in two Kelim and their He’arah is
incorporated in one another, which is in ZON de Kli de Keter of
Partzuf AB.
• The third is in Partzuf SAG de AK, when the Nekeva is clothed
there in the Kli Zachar de Keter.
(Ohr Pnimi Item 62 par. “However, he has already”)
68. Why are the Reshimo de Keter and Reshimo de Nekeva called
Zachar and Nekeva?
The Reshimo de Behina Dalet is half a Reshimo from the Behinat
Aviut de Hitlabshut, devoid of Behinat Aviut de Hamshacha. Hence,
she is not suitable to extend any Ohr, unless in joining with the
Reshimo de Nekeva, namely Aviut de Behina Gimel, which is complete
with Behinat Hamshacha too. For this reason these two Reshimot are
considered as two parts of a body; one gives the Hitlabshut, and one
gives the Hamshacha. For this reason they are called ZON.
69. What are the Behinot of the Orot de ZON de Keter of Hitpashtut
Bet?
The Zachar is the Behinat Ohr Keter, and the Nekeva is Behinat Ohr
Hochma.
(Item 4, and Ohr Pnimi there)
70. How do the three Orot, Ohr Keter and Zachar and Nekeva de Keter
stand at the Malchut of the Rosh?
Each Anaf stands under its proximate Shoresh. The Ohr Keter under
the Malchut of the Rosh, the Ohr Zachar, which is the Reshimo of that
Ohr Keter stands below it, and the Ohr Nekeva, which is the Reshimo
de Aviut de Behina Gimel, considered an Anaf de Behina Dalet, stands
under the Zachar.
(Item 9, and Ohr Pnimi par. “Remember these three names”)
71. How many Zivugim are there to the ZON de Keter in the Rosh?
They make two Zivugim: The first is on the common Aviut from
Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut with Behina Gimel de Hamshacha. This

--- PAGE 166 ---
Zivug extends nearly Komat Keter. The second is a Zivug made only
on Aviut de Behina Gimel. This Zivug extends only Komat Hochma.
(Item 9, and Ohr Pnimi Sub Header “The Nekeva”)
72. How is the He’arat Keter Elyon extended by the ZON that rose to
the Rosh?
ZON de Kli de Keter that participate in their kinds of Aviut together
cause the ascent of Malchut to the Yesod de Rosh, which is Behina
Gimel de Rosh. Also, they are incorporated there together like ZON de
Keter de Guf.
This is so because Malchut is Behina Dalet and the Yesod is Behina
Gimel. Thus, the Ohr Yesod did not rise upward and Malchut did not
purify from her Behina Dalet when she rose to the Yesod, but only to
the extent of the lack of Hamshacha that the Zachar de Kli de Keter
lacked.
Hence, the Zivug that emerged on the common Aviut of Yesod and
Malchut de Rosh extended nearly Komat Keter. The Orot de Rosh did
not change their places and the Ohr Keter remained in its place and
did not descend to the degree of Hochma. For this reason the He’arat
Keter Elyon was elicited by that Zivug.
(Item 9, and Ohr Pnimi par. “However, note”)
73. How is it possible that Malchut de Rosh would rise to Behina
Gimel and the Orot would not change their places?
When Malchut de Rosh is not completely purified to Behina Gimel,
but receives Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut of the Zachar de Kli de Keter
inside her, she then participates with Behina Gimel de Rosh. In this
manner she extends the Ohr de Keter Elyon and the Orot do not
change their places, see answer 72.
(Item 9, and Ohr Pnimi par. “The reason for it”)
74. When are the ZON together in the Yesod de Rosh?
During the ascent of Malchut de Rosh to Yesod de Rosh only in the
form of association, not in the form of Hizdakchut, see answer 73.

--- PAGE 167 ---
(Item 6)
75. What is the Hitkalelut of the Nekeva in the Zachar?
Behina Gimel, which is the Nekeva that has Behinat Hamshacha as
well, participates with the Behina Dalet de Zachar and incorporates
with him in one Masach. At that time it draws upon it nearly Komat
Keter.
(Item 9, and Ohr Pnimi Sub Header “The Nekeva”)
76. What causes the descent of the degrees?
Malchut de Rosh ascends to Yesod from Behinat Hizdakchut to Behina
Gimel and a Zivug Elyon in Komat Hochma emerges on the Masach in
her. At that time the degrees descend there since the Ohr Hochma
clothes in Kli de Keter, the Ohr Bina in Kli de Hochma, etc.
It follows that Keter descended to the degree of Hochma and Hochma
descended to the degree of Bina etc. This is so because the Kli is
drawn primarily after the Ohr in it. When Ohr Hochma clothes Kli de
Keter, the Keter descends to the degree of Hochma etc.
(Item 10, and Ohr Pnimi Sub Header “Hence, the Shoresh”)
77. Why does the He’arat Keter Elyon de Zivug Aleph of the Rosh not
extend to the Guf?
Because a Behinat Hamshacha from the Aviut de Behina Dalet is
missing there. Because of that lack, Malchut cannot expand from her
and within her to Eser Sefirot de Guf to Malchut de Malchut, called
Tabur.
(Item 10, and Ohr Pnimi par. “He writes”)
78. What makes Ohr Keter exit Malchut of the Rosh?
When Keter’s time to go back down to the Guf from above downward
comes, though it has not returned, still the Behinat Guf contained in it
since it was in Hitpashtut Aleph has awakened. This is in disparity of
form from Behinat Malchut of the Rosh, and it is known that Shinui
Tzura separates and parts the spirituals. For this reason it is considered
to have left Malchut of the Rosh.

--- PAGE 168 ---
(Item 10, and Ohr Pnimi par. “Still”)
79. What caused the Zachar de Keter mingle with the Nekeva in Zivug
Bet?
The previous Hitkalelut of the Nekeva in the Zachar that was in the
first Zivug that equalized them together, caused the Zachar later
mingle with the Nekeva in a second Zivug.
(Item 11)
80. What does the Hitkalelut of ZON de Keter do in the two Zivugim of
the Rosh?
It is through these Zivugim that ZON are incorporated. The Zachar is
incorporated in the new Koma of Ohr Hochma that expands and
descends to the Guf entirely, and the Nekeva acquired He’arah from
Keter Elyon. In that they unite and mingle in Kli de Keter of the Guf
as well, and both receive from the Achoraim of the Ohr Keter as well.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “We must understand”)
81. How were ZON de Kli de Keter emanated?
Through the ascent of the Masach de Tabur of Histalkut Aleph to the
Rosh. It raised these two Reshimot de Behina Dalet and Behina Gimel
with it. These, in turn, are ZON de Kli de Keter, where they mingled in
Malchut of the Rosh in the two Zivugim, received their completion,
and descended to the Guf to the Kli Keter.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “The Masach”)
82. How were ZON de Kli de Hochma emanated?
The Nukva left the Achoraim de Kli de Keter because of the Bitush de
Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi, and also purified from Behina Gimel to
Behina Bet. At that time Komat Bina emerged on Behina Bet and gave
to Kli de Hochma.
Also, the Zachar de Keter, which is Behina Dalet, purified into
Behina Gimel and gave this residue to the Kli of Hochma. He became
the Zachar de Kli de Hochma, and Komat Bina that was emanated
from the Nekeva became Behinat Nekeva de Kli de Hochma.

--- PAGE 169 ---
(Ohr Pnimi item 35, par. “However, we must remember”)
83. How were ZON de Kli de Bina emanated?
The Zachar was emanated by the inversion of the Panim de Kli de
Hochma to illuminate without giving Orot, meaning only the
inversion of the Panim from Behinat GAR to Behinat VAK. It still did
not purify to Behina Aleph.
At that time ZON de Kli de Hochma mated and procreated the Zachar
de Bina, which is Yod, from the Behinat VAK in them. They gave it to
the Kli de Bina, where he became Behinat Zachar de Bina.
Afterwards the Kli de Hochma purified into Behina Aleph, over which
extended a Koma of Ohr Hesed and gave it to the Kli de Bina. This is
considered a son of Bina, and the Reshimo found in the Kli de Bina
from the time of Hitpashtut Aleph became the Behinat Nekeva of
Bina.
(Ohr Pnimi item 35, Sub Header “Hochma turns”)
84. How many Zivugim are there in ZON de Keter, in ZON de Hochma
and in ZON de Bina when they rise in Malchut of the Rosh?
Two Zivugim: 1 – The Hitkalelut of the Nekeva in the Zachar and the
Koma that extends in the measure of the Zachar; 2 – The Hitkalelut of
the Zachar in the Nekeva and the Koma extended in the measure of
the Nekeva.
(Ohr Pnimi item 9, par. “Hence, when the Masach”)
85. What is the difference between ZON de Keter de AB de AK and
ZON de Keter de SAG de AK?
In ZON de Keter de AB de AK, the first Zivug is nearly in Komat
Keter, and the second Zivug is in Komat Hochma. However, ZON de
Keter de SAG, the first Zivug is nearly in Komat Hochma and the
second Zivug is in Komat Bina.
86. What is the difference between ZON de Hochma de AB de AK and
ZON de Hochma de SAG de AK?

--- PAGE 170 ---
In Hochma de AB the Zachar is in Komat Hochma and the Nekeva is
in Komat Bina. In ZON de Hochma de SAG de AB the Zachar is in
Komat Bina, extended from Zivug ZON de Keter, and the Nekeva is
the Behinat Reshimo de Bina found in Kli de Hochma since Hitpashtut
Aleph.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “Now we shall explain”)
87. What is the difference between ZON de Bina de AB de AK and
ZON de Bina de SAG de AK?
In ZON de Bina de AB the Zachar is Behinat VAK de GAR, meaning
VAK de Hochma, and the Nekeva is Behinat Reshimo de Hitpashtut
Aleph. In ZON de Bina de SAG they are Behinot Reshimot that
remained from Hitpashtut Bet, from Orot de ZON de Bina de AB after
their Histalkut.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “We have already learned”)
88. What is the difference between the Five Ktzavot de AB and the
Five Ktzavot de SAG?
Hey Ktzavot de AB contain He’arat Hochma, but the Hey Ktzavot de
SAG contain only He’arat Bina.
(There)
89. What are the five Orot in the two Kelim?
Two Orot in Kli de Hochma, which are ZON, and three Orot in Kli de
Bina, which are Zachar and Nekeva de Bina and the Ohr Hesed in
Bina, containing the whole ZAT.
(Ohr Pnimi item 55, Sub Header “These ascents”)
90. When is the name YH in Keter Pashut and when is it with a filling?
When the Masach purifies and there is no Zivug in Keter, the name
YH is Pashut, without filling. When there is a Zivug in Keter, the
name YH is in filling.
(Item 56)
91. When do four Orot ascend and when do five Orot ascend to the
Keter?

--- PAGE 171 ---
Four Orot rise in AB de AK and five Orot rise in SAG de AK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 55, Sub Header “Sometimes”)
92. What is the filling in the YH de Keter when four Orot rise to Keter?
The Hey de YH is filled with Yod like this: Hey Yod. This is because
the lower three of the four Orot are cancelled in the Elyon in them,
which is the Ohr Hochma implied in the Yod.
(Item 56)
93. What is the meaning of the Otiot of the filling?
The Otiot themselves are the Kelim, and their filling is the
measurements of the Aviut found in the Masach in them. They are the
measurement of the height of the Koma.
94. What are the fillings of Yodin, Heyin, and Alephin?
The measure of Aviut de Behina Gimel and Behina Bet are Yodin, the
measurements of Aviut de Behina Aleph is Alephin, and the Behinot
Ohr Malchut are the Heyin.
(Ohr Pnimi item 56, Sub Header “In Yodin”)
95. What is the meaning of YH without a filling?
When the Otiot are without filling, it indicates that there is no Aviut in
the Masach in them and there is no Zivug de Hakaa that extends Ohr.
(Item 58)
96. When do ZON de Keter equalize with each other and when is the
Zachar greater than the Nekeva?
The Zachar and the Nekeva are equal to each other when they are
without Ohr, but only as Reshimot. Although the Zachar is a Reshimo
of the Keter and the Nekeva is a Reshimo of Hochma, which is much
lower than Keter, still, because it is devoid of Behina Dalet de
Hamshacha, it is not destined to return to the Partzuf. For this reason
his Reshimo is very small.
However, the Reshimo of the Nekeva is complete in Behinat
Hamshacha too, and her Ohr, which is the Ohr Hochma, is destined to

--- PAGE 172 ---
return to the Partzuf entirely. Thus, a great Ohr still remains in her
Reshimo until she equalizes with the Reshimo de Zachar, though she
is from Behinat Keter.
Nevertheless, after they ascended to the Rosh they were mingled there
in two Zivugim. In the first Zivug, the Reshimo de Zachar received the
He’arat Keter Elyon, at which time the Zachar is much greater than
the Nukva.
Even though the Nekeva is incorporated in him, she can still receive
only VAK from him, not the He’arat GAR. Thus, the Nekeva is
considered Behinat VAK with respect to the Zachar.
(Item 59)
97. When are ZON de Keter in two Kelim and when are they in one
Kli?
ZON are found in two Kelim in the first Behina de Hitpashtut Bet,
called AB de AK. In the second Behina de Hitpashtut Bet, called SAG
de AK, ZON are found in one Kli.
(Item 60)
98. Why are ZON de SAG de AK in one Kli?
Because of the Hitkalelut of the Nekeva in the Zachar in the two
Zivugim of the Rosh, her measure of Ohr grew extensively and she
needs a new Kli that will fit her measure of Ohr. She acquires that Kli
in Partzuf AB by the Hakaa of the Reshimo and the Ohr Hochma on
each other.
Because there was no Hakaa in SAG, Nitzotzin were not educed for
the purpose of the Kli de Nekeva. For this reason she must clothe in
the Kli Zachar.
(Ohr Pnimi item 60)
99. How does the Nekeva de Keter receive from Keter Elyon?
In Histalkut Bet, when ZON rose to Malchut of the Rosh, two Zivugim
were incorporated there, similar to the ascents of ZON after Histalkut
Aleph. Here too the Nekeva received He’arat Keter Elyon in the first

--- PAGE 173 ---
Zivug, but the difference is that here the degrees descended and there
was Ohr Hochma in Kli de Keter Elyon.
100. Why does the Nekeva de Partzuf SAG de AK receive only VAK of
the Zachar?
The Ohr Keter that remained in the Rosh and did not return to Guf de
AB, it turned to its Anafim and prevented He’arat GAR from them.
Similarly, the Ohr Hochma that did not return to the Guf de Partzuf
SAG de AK turned its Achoraim too to the Anafim and prevented
He’arat GAR from them. Thus, the Nekeva could not receive from the
Ohr Zachar, but only He’arat VAK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 61)
101. Why is ZON de Hochma of SAG de AK called VH and not YH?
Because here in Partzuf SAG, the degrees and ZON de Keter
descended similarly to ZON de Hochma de AB. Also, ZON de Hochma
here are similar to ZON de Bina in Partzuf AB.
Hence, ZON de Hochma here contain only Behinat VAK de Hochma,
like the Zachar de Bina de AB, called Dalet. The Zachar, which is
VAK, is called Vav, since every VAK is Vav and not Yod. Still, in
themselves they are sometimes called YH too, like ZON de Bina de
AB.
(Ohr Pnimi item 61, Sub Header “Two sons”)
102. When do the Orot ascend and incorporate in the Zachar de Keter
and when do the Orot ascend and incorporate in the Nekeva de
Keter?
It is a rule that there is only ascent of MAN to the Nekeva. Hence,
when four Orot rise to Keter, which are ZON de Hochma, ZON de
Bina and the Ohr Hesed remain in the Partzuf.
This is in Partzuf AB de AK, where the Ohr Hesed remained before it
completed all of its ten inlets. At that time the Orot rise in the Kli de
Nekeva of the Keter, since there are two kinds of Kelim to ZON.

--- PAGE 174 ---
However, when five Orot rise to Keter, which is only in Partzuf SAG,
as there is a perpetual Matei ve Lo Matei there, every time de Matei to
Malchut, all the Orot ascend to Keter and it returns to being Matei in
Keter. Thus, five Orot ascend here. These are ZON de Hochma, ZON
de Bina, and the Ohr Hesed, containing the entire ZAT.
Here the Orot rise to the Kli of the Zachar de Keter, called Yod,
because there is only one Kli to the ZON here. Thus, although they too
rise to the Nekeva, here the Nekeva itself is here in a Kli de Zachar,
hence the Orot rise after it to the Kli Zachar too.
All this refers only to the ascent of the Orot to Keter, but at the end of
the departure, when they rise to the Rosh, all the Orot incorporate in
the ZON de Keter and annul in them. This is because the Orot Elyonim
are somewhat incorporated in the Zachar and some in the Nekeva, like
the two Zivugim that ZON make there.
In the first Zivug, the Nekeva de Keter too is incorporated in the
Zachar, and in the second Zivug, made in the attribute of the Nekeva,
all the Orot are contained there in the Nekeva. For this reason some of
the Orot are contained in the Zachar and some in the Nekeva.
(Ohr Pnimi item 62, par. “However, he has already”)
103. When do the Orot ascend, some in the Nekeva and some in the
Zachar of Keter?
See above answer 102.
104. Why was the ascent of MAN not caused in Hitpashtut Aleph, when
HB rose to Keter, as in the ascent of HB to Keter in Hitpashtut Bet?
The Histalkut of Hitpashtut Aleph is considered as one Histalkut,
instantaneous. This is so because only one Kli was made there and all
five Komot that came out there are considered one Ohr because of the
Hizdakchut of the Masach.
Here, however, in Hitpashtut Bet, the Kelim precede the Orot. This is
because all the Kelim with the Nitzotzin and the Reshimot in
Hitpashtut Aleph moved to Behinot Kelim de Hitpashtut Bet and were

--- PAGE 175 ---
placed one under the other even before the Ohr of Hitpashtut Bet
returned to the Partzuf.
Hence, each and every Kli here is considered a separate matter in
itself. When the Zivugim de ZON are made in Malchut of the Rosh and
the Komat Hochma descends to the Partzuf, she becomes completely
clothed in Kli de Keter and the Ohr Lo Matei in any other Kli.
Hence, the Kli Keter is considered a special Partzuf, having its own
Hitpashtut and its own Histalkut, and similarly in the rest of the
Kelim. Hence, the Kli de Keter became qualified to return to its Aviut
and to its Zivug through the ascent of the Orot de HB in a way that
will be explained below (answer 105).
However, the Kli de Keter de Hitpashtut Aleph is connected with the
nine lower Sefirot into one degree and one Behina. There is no
difference between the Kelim de HB and the Kli de Keter since all of
them together are only one Ohr clothed in one Kli.
105. What is raising MAN?
Each Anaf that is emanated and leaves its Shoresh is in its greatest
wholeness during the process of its emanation, before it is separated
and comes to its own authority and degree. This is so because then it
is in the place of its Shoresh and is considered a part of it, in the form
of eating what its mother eats.
However, afterwards, when it comes down to its place, it diminishes
and lessens according to its property. This creates a permanent nexus
between each Anaf and its Shoresh, where the Shoresh tends to
enhance its Anaf to the same measure it was in, before it descended to
its place.
This first beginning was rooted in the Shoresh and it wishes to keep it
always. Yet, because of the Katnut of the Kelim of the Anaf, they
cannot receive the administration of the Shoresh; they receive only
according to their ability.
Hence, when the Anaf rises to its Shoresh once more, it awakens the
Shoresh to extend the same Orot it had when it emanated it, and

--- PAGE 176 ---
adapts itself to the Anaf until it can give it the entire Gadlut it gave it
since the beginning of it creation. This is the meaning of ascents of
MAN. It means that it awakens new Orot in its Shoresh because of its
ascent to it.
You already know that there are two kinds of inversions of Panim
downward during the emanation of a lower degree: the first is the
inversion of the Panim of the Kli that the Keter cancelled its Behinat
Panim. This was only to dispense GAR, and it made it into Panim in
order to emanate the Zachar de Kli de Hochma.
The second is the inversion of the Panim de Behinat Masach, meaning
Hizdakchut from the great Aviut to the lesser Aviut, meaning the
Hizdakchut of Behina Gimel of the Nekeva de Keter to Behina Bet,
which is Komat Bina, who did that for the Nekeva de Hochma.
Thus, when ZON de Hochma too were purified from Behina Bet to
Behina Aleph and the Zivug stopped from them for their Koma, the
same two kinds of inversion of Panim occurred in them to emanate
ZON of Bina. You find that Kli de Hochma too acquired a Behinat
Panim of VAK, like the Kli de Keter.
This Hishtavut Tzura returned the Orot de HB to the Kli de Keter, and
then Kli de Keter too returned its Panim of He’arat VAK to their place
as in the beginning. In order to illuminate its Anafim to ZON de
Hochma, with whom they now united as in the beginning of their
Atzilut before they came down to their place, ZON de Keter returned
and corrected their Masach in Aviut of Behina Gimel and Behina
Dalet as in the beginning.
They extended the same two Zivugim of theirs and dispensed their
Orot to the designated Anafim that they are connected with. This is
called “ascents of MAN”.
106. Why did all the Orot ascend to MAN to Keter in all the exits and
the Lo Matei of Hitpashtut Bet, and not to Rosh, as in Hitpashtut
Aleph?

--- PAGE 177 ---
The matter of the ascent to Malchut of Rosh means Hishtavut with
Malchut de Rosh. This is only after the Masach had been entirely
purified from all its Aviut. Hence, in all these exits and entrances that
were in Hitpashtut Bet, before the Ohr de Matei to Malchut, the
Masach still did not purify entirely.
This is because until de Matei to Hod, its still had Aviut de Behina
Aleph, and when de Matei to Yesod it still had Aviut de Shoresh, which
extends Komat Malchut. Therefore, it is still in Shinui Tzura from
Malchut of the Rosh.
However, after de Matei to the Kli Malchut, it purified completely like
the Behinat Malchut of the Rosh. At that time it rose to the Malchut of
the Rosh and the Zivugim for its lower Partzuf, called SAG, were made
there. This is because the ascents of all the Orot to Rosh always elicit
another Partzuf, a son of the previous Partzuf.
107. What are the first Kelim de Akudim?
These are the Kelim of Hitpashtut Aleph de AK. Before him there was
no Hitlabshut in the Olamot.
(Ohr Pnimi item 5)
108. What causes annulment of the Kelim?
The Hizdakchut of the Masach from the Behinat Aviut in the Kli
causes the annulment of the Kli, as it is unfit to receive any Ohr when
it lacks a Masach. Also, the return of the Ohr Keter as it was in
Hitpashtut causes the annulment of the Kelim, because the Kelim mix
with the Orot.
(Ohr Pnimi item 5, Sub Header “If the Ohr”)
109. Where did the Kelim for the Partzuf of Hitpashtut Bet come from?
They were gathered from many Behinot:
1. From the Kelim that were emptied in Histalkut Aleph and were
arranged here one below the other, Keter first, Hochma next, and so
on, and Malchut last. These are primarily Kelim de Zecharim,
though the Nekevot too were mingled there with the Zecharim.

--- PAGE 178 ---
2. The Nitzotzin from the Hakaa of the Reshimot with the descending
Ohr Hozer that fell into these Kelim, as written in Part 4.
3. The Kelim de Ohr Hochma itself. After Malchut of the Rosh
extended Komat Hochma of Rosh, she expanded once more from
above downward into Eser Sefirot from her and within her to her
Malchut, called Chazeh.
4. These are the Kelim that were made by the Hakaa of Ohr Reshimo
and Ohr Hochma on each other. The Kelim for GAR were made
from their Nitzotzin.
5. These are the Kelim that were made anew in Hitpashtut Bet itself
by Histalkut Bet here in ten exits de Lo Matei, though they belong
to Partzuf SAG.
110. Where did the Kelim for Partzuf SAG de AK come from?
All the Kelim that were emptied from the Orot of Partzuf AB, moved
to Partzuf SAG by the very same ways explained above in answer 109
regarding the transference of the Kelim de Hitpashtut Aleph to
Hitpashtut Bet.
111. Why do ZON de AB have two Kelim and ZON de SAG only one
Kli?
Since there were no Haka’ot here to generate Nitzotzin for the Nekeva.
112. Why did all the Orot come to Kli de Keter together in Hitpashtut
Bet?
Because that Zivug which is made on the Behinot Reshimot called
ZON de Kli de Keter was at nearly Komat Keter. Hence, they could
only come down and clothe in their designated Kli, being Kli de Keter.
However, after they were purified and their Koma lessened to the
Koma of the other Sefirot, they descended and clothed in them to that
extent.
(Ohr Pnimi item 35, par. “Now you can”)
113. What are Panim and Achor de Kelim?

--- PAGE 179 ---
A place of bestowal is called Panim, and the place through which it
does not bestow is called Achor. It makes no difference if that place is
administration of GAR or administration of VAK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “The meaning of Panim and Achor”)
114. Why are the Kelim de Hitpashtut Bet arranged one below the
other?
Because thus was their beginning when they were made in Histalkut
Aleph, where Keter is above all and Malchut is at the end.
115. What are the Panim and Achor de KHB?
• The Panim de Kli Keter is He’arat VAK that prevents GAR, and the
Achor is He’arat GAR.
• The Panim de Kli de Hochma is He’arat GAR and the Achor is
He’arat VAK.
• The Panim de Kli de Bina is He’arat VAK, which is Hassadim, but
it depends on a reason in the form of “because He delighteth in
mercy.” If there is He’arat Hassadim in the Partzuf, the reason is
cancelled, and then it cancels her Achoraim.
• The Panim de Kli de Hesed is He’arat GAR and its Achor is
He’arat VAK since it extends from the He’arat Hochma and
resembles her.
• The Panim de Gevura is He’arat VAK and her Achor GAR. This is
because she extends from the He’arat Kli de Bina and resembles
her.
• The Panim de Tifferet is a mixture of He’arat HG together,
meaning from the Behinat Gevura when she is incorporated in the
Panim de Hesed, and his Achor is He’arat VAK.
• The Panim de Netzah is He’arat VAK and his Achor is He’arat
GAR.
• The Panim de Hod is He’arat GAR and his Achor is He’arat VAK.
• The Panim de Yesod is He’arat VAK, and his Achor is He’arat
GAR.

--- PAGE 180 ---
• The Panim de Malchut is He’arat GAR.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “The meaning of Panim and Achor”)
116. Why are there no Kelim in the Partzuf due to the Hitpashtut Bet of
itself?
This is because a Kli is not completed before the Ohr drifts three
distances from it. Because of that only the Kelim de ZON were
completed, and they move to the next Partzuf, where the Ohr returns
in the same empty Kelim. Thus, the Kelim that were made in Histaklut
Bet of the Partzuf are only for the needs of the second Partzuf.
117. What is the difference between Hitpashtut Aleph and Hitpashtut
Bet?
In Hitpashtut Aleph there was only one Hitpashtut and one Histalkut,
though it departed gradually. However, in Hitpashtut Bet it expanded
by and order of Matei ve Lo Matei, creating ten exits and ten entrances
until de Matei to Malchut.
(Item 20)
118. How are the Kelim de GAR made?
The Kelim de GAR, being KHB, were made by Hitpashtut Bet itself,
since the Ohr Hochma dressed there in Kli de Keter and the Zachar de
Keter clothes inside the Ohr Hochma. By that the bad Ohr falls from
within the Reshimo and becomes a Behinat Kli below the Ohr
Hochma, as the Ohr Hochma clothes in it.
It follows, that Hochma separates between the Ohr Reshimo, which is
the Zachar de Keter, and the bad Ohr that was separated from him, the
Kli de Keter becomes very dark, and in that state its Behinat Kli is
finished. The Kelim de Hochma and Bina are made similarly.
(Item 50)
119. What are the causes of the completion of the Kelim de GAR?
There are three causes here:
1. Because of the division and the departure of the good Ohr of the
Reshimo from the bad Ohr in it.

--- PAGE 181 ---
2. Because of the coming of the Ohr Hochma in the middle, separating
between the good Ohr of the Reshimo and the bad Ohr that was
separated from it.
3. Because of the Achoraim of the root Ohr Keter that did not return for
Hitpashtut Bet. It remained standing under Malchut of the Rosh with
its Achoraim to the Anafim, meaning to the Sefirot de Guf. These
Achoraim of the Ohr Keter diminish the Ohr extensively and darken
the Sefirot KHB even more than they had during Histalkut Aleph itself.
For this reason they darken the Kelim as if the Ohr is far three
degrees.
(Ohr Pnimi item 50. par. “The Rav gives”)
120. What are the parts in the Kli that are worthy of looking into the
Ohr even during the Histalkut?
These are the Behinot that exist in the Hitzoniut of the Kli. They are
not as Av as the inner half of the wall. For example: if the Pnimiut of
the Kli is Behina Dalet and Komat Keter leaves it, the Hitzoniut of the
Kli, which is Behina Gimel, is fit to receive more Ohr from the
He’arat Zivug of its Upper Behina, being Komat Behina Gimel. Also,
her Behina Bet is fit to receive more of the He’arat Zivug in the
degree above the Upper.
(Item 15)
121. What causes the Kli to turn its Panim downward and its Achoraim
upward?
When the Ohr departs from the degree and the Zivug is made in the
degree above it, such as in Behina Bet, the Ohr Hozer descends from
the He’arat Zivug de Behina Bet to the lower Behina Gimel. At that
time there is a Bitush between the Reshimo de Behina Gimel and the
descending Ohr Hozer.
This is so because the He’arah de Behina Bet is in oppositeness to the
Reshimo de Behina Gimel. At that time the Reshimo leaves its place
and rises above the Kli, giving room for the Ohr Hozer to clothe in the
Kli de Behina Gimel.

--- PAGE 182 ---
Thus, this Ohr Hozer clothes the outer half of the wall of that Kli,
which fits its measure of Koma, being in Behina Bet and Behina
Gimel, which is Achor de Behina Gimel. You find that the Panim de
Behina Gimel remains empty of Ohr, and the Achor de Behina Gimel,
which is the Behina Bet, is filled with Ohr.
This is called turning its Achoraim upwards and its Panim
downwards. It follows, that the Ohr Hozer that descends from the
He’arat Zivug of the Upper degree causes the Kli of the lower degree
to turn its Panim downward.
(Ohr Pnimi item 15, par. “All this refers”)
122. What causes the Kli to turn its Panim to its place as in the
beginning?
After the Zivug stops from the adjacent Upper degree as well and the
Ohr Hozer that descends into her Kli stops, the Reshimo returns into
her Kli. Thus, you find that the Kli returns its Panim upwards and its
Achoraim downward as in the beginning.
This is because now the Achor of the Kli cannot receive the He’arat
Reshimo, which is Behina Gimel, it returns to being Hitzoniut of the
Kli as in the beginning, and the entire He’arat Reshimo comes to the
Kli, which is Behina Gimel.
(Ohr Pnimi item 16, Sub Header “Will be able”)
123. What is Histaklut in the Ohr Elyon through the Achor?
The Ohr departs from the Kli and the Zivug is made in the degree
above it, such as when it departs from Behina Gimel and the Zivug is
made in Behina Bet. At that time the Achor of this Kli, which is
Behina Bet, looks at the Ohr Elyon, meaning it receives from the
He’arat Zivug there.
(Ohr Pnimi item 15, Sub Header “It looks”)
124. How will the Orot be extended from Keter to Hochma when they
are so far from each other?

--- PAGE 183 ---
Their Komot equalize with one another and they are Panim be Panim
by the Hizdakchut of the Aviut and the turning of the Panim
downward.
(Ohr Pnimi item 35, par. “However, we must remember”)
125. What two kinds of inversions of the Panim are implemented in the
degrees?
An Upper degree cannot dispense to the lower one except though
Hishtavut with it, at which time they are close to one another. Hence,
there is a measure of inversion of the Panim de Elyon to the measure
of the Panim of the Tachton, and this is called Panim be Panim.
There are two Behinot of inversion of the Panim:
1. Every Kli is defined by its Behinat bestowal, by its nature, whether
He’arat VAK or He’arat GAR. This is because Kli de Keter naturally
administers VAK, not GAR.
Thus, when it dispenses to Hochma, whose Panim is GAR, the Keter
must invert its Panim downward and its Achoraim upward to Behinat
Panim, in order to equalize its Panim with the Panim de Hochma. It is
similar in all the other Sefirot.
2. The second is the Hishtavut Koma, also named “inversion of the
Panim downward”. For example, Komat Keter cannot administer to
the degree of Hochma except through the Hizdakchut of the Aviut de
Behina Dalet to Behina Gimel that extends Komat Hochma. In that
state, Komat Keter is equal to the degree of Hochma, and the Keter
dispenses its He’arah to the Hochma.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “The Masach”)
126. What causes the division of the Sefirot Hochma and Bina?
The inversion of the Panim de Kli de Hochma downward and the
making of the Achor, which is He’arat VAK, into her Panim, like the
Panim de Kli of Bina. By so doing, Hochma is divided into two
Behinot, meaning administration of GAR and administration of VAK.

--- PAGE 184 ---
The Kli Hochma itself is considered administration of GAR, and the
Kli de Bina, which received VAK de Hochma, is considered
administration of VAK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “Keep in mind”)
127. Why do all the Sefirot remain in Panim and Achor after Histalkut
Aleph?
This is because once the Zivug stops form the highest Behina, from
the Kli whose Ohr has emptied, the Reshimo returns to her place and
the Kli returns its Panim to its place as in the beginning (see answer
122). Hence, all the Kelim remain in Behinat Panim and Achor after
the completion of the Histalkut, meaning the Panim of the Tachton in
the Achor of the Elyon.
(Item 18)
128. Why did Keter and Hochma remain Panim be Panim after
Histalkut Aleph?
Because Behina Dalet did not leave a Reshimo. It is known that
Behina Dalet serves as Panim to the Kli de Keter, which is the most
Av in the Masach, called Panim. That which is not so Av is considered
the Achor de Keter.
It is considered that its Panim is downward and equalizes with the
Panim de Hochma since it has grown close to Behina Gimel of the
Hochma. Even though Reshimo de Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut
remains there, it is not enough to return the Panim de Kli de Keter as
in the beginning. Also, this causes the Ohr Keter to remain in the Peh
and not return in Hitpashtut Bet.
(Ohr Pnimi item 18)
129. Why is Keter Achor be Achor with the Ohr Elyon?
Because the Kli lacks its primary Reshimo, which is a Reshimo de
Hamshacha, and the Reshimo de Hitlabshut that remains in it is
considered the Achor de Kli de Keter. Also, her Ohr up in the Rosh
stands with its Achoraim to the Anafim in the Guf.

--- PAGE 185 ---
(There)
130. What is the meaning of a Moment in spirituality?
See at the end of Histaklut Pnimit Part 1. It explains there that
Spiritual Time is considered motion, and Spiritual Motion is
considered a Hidush Tzura that is attained there. From that we
understand that the slightest Shinui Tzura, the slightest there is, is
called “A Moment”.
131. When is the Kli Malchut completed in Histalkut Aleph?
When the Ohr Malchut rose to Kli de Hochma, a distance of three
degrees has been made between the Ohr and the Kli, and then the Kli
darkened and was completed.
(Item 17 and Ohr Pnimi there)
132. When is Kli ZA completed in Histalkut Aleph?
When Ohr ZA rose to its Shoresh to the Rosh. This is because then a
distance of three degrees without Ohr has been made between the Ohr
and the Kli, hence the Kli was darkened and completed (see below
answer 134).
(There)
133. Why is any less than three is considered filled?
This is so because up to three degrees, the Kli still receives from Orot
Makifim. This is so because when Ohr Malchut ascends to ZA,
Malchut receives one Makif. When it rises to Bina, she receives a
second Makif, but when Ohr Malchut rises to Kli de Hochma, it no
longer receives any He’arah, hence the Kli darkens and is completed.
(There)
134. Why is the ascent of ZA to Bina not considered remoteness of
degree?
As long as there is some Ohr in a Kli, even though it is not its own
Behina, it is not considered remoteness of degree. Hence, when Ohr
ZA rises to Kli de Bina, at which time Ohr Malchut rises to Kli de ZA,
it is still considered having Ohr Pnimi in its Kli.

--- PAGE 186 ---
However, afterwards, when Ohr ZA rose to Kli de Hochma, it is
considered remoteness of one degree. When it rises to Kli de Keter, it
is considered remoteness of two degrees, when the Kli still receives
from Orot Makifim; it is still not completely darkened. Only when it
rises to the Maatzil is it completely darkened and its Kli is completed.
(Items 50 and 27)
135. When was there Lo Matei in Keter for the first time?
In the Histalkut Orot de Hitpashtut Aleph, called Partzuf Keter. For
this reason it is called Histalkut of the Ohr Keter.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
136. Why is Histalkut Aleph called Lo Matei in Keter?
See above answer 135.
137. Who causes the Lo Matei in Hitpashtut Bet every time?
The Bitush and Hakaa of Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
138. Why were the Matei ve Lo Matei made into ten Orot and were not
made into ten Kelim?
Because with respect to the Kli itself, there is only one Hizdakchut and
one Histalkut here. This is so because in the end, there is only one Kli
Malchut here, and no Kelim were added to the Kli Malchut by all these
Histalkuiot (pl. for Histalkut). The Eser Sefirot that we discern are like
one long Kli containing ten parts, not equal to each other.
(Item 22, and Ohr Pnimi there)
139. Why is the permanent Matei ve Lo Matei compared to a flame
swaying here and there?
Because at the moment de Matei to Malchut and the Ohr departed
from the Partzuf entirely, it immediately returned to being Matei in
Keter, until the disappearance of the Ohr was like a flame swaying
here and there.
(Ohr Pnimi item 49)

--- PAGE 187 ---
140. What is the ratio between ZON de Hochma and ZON de Bina?
Although they are discerned as one Koma, namely Koma de Behina
Bet, they are still related as VAK relates to GAR. This is because ZON
de Hochma are considered GAR and ZON de Bina are considered VAK
de GAR.
It is like YESHSUT de Atzilut compared to AVI de Atzilut. The Zachar
de Kli de Bina was born from Zivug ZON de Hochma when they
turned their Panim downwards, meaning when they cancelled the
He’arat GAR in them and received the Panim de VAK.
Hence, the Zachar was born in Behinat Achoraim de Hochma and in
Behinat VAK. The Nekeva de Bina is Behinat GAR, which is a
Reshimo without Ohr, and she receives all the Ohr in her through the
Zachar, which is VAK, and for this reason the force of the Zachar is
on her.
Also, the Kli Bina is also Behinat VAK de GAR in its Atzmut, in the
form of “because He delighteth in mercy.” Thus, ZON de Bina are
considered Behinat VAK de GAR.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “Keep in mind”)
141. How is Hesed emanated?
First it was Lo Matei in Keter. Due to the Bitush de Ohr Makif and
Ohr Pnimi on each other, the ZON de Keter were purified, which are
Behina Dalet and Behina Gimel to Behina Gimel and Behina Bet.
They gave them to the Hochma in Behinot ZON de Hochma, and then
the Panim de Hochma returned to their place as in the beginning.
Hence, ZON de Bina returned and rose to Hochma since VAK always
join their GAR when they are disclosed.
Thus, now Hochma joined Bina into one degree. Consequently, the
Ohr Hesed which is in Kli de Bina now receives He’arat Hochma,
because of the unification of Hochma and Bina.
Hesed became great because it acquired He’arat Hochma. This means
that it no longer needs to suck from the Kli de Bina to Behina Aleph in

--- PAGE 188 ---
order to equalize with the Kli de Hesed, and the Ohr Hesed was
lowered to the Kli de Hesed.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “Interpretation”)
142. What is Behinat Kli de Hesed?
It is Behinat Keter of the Hey Behinot de Ohr Hassadim, since KHB of
the Ohr Hassadim is called HGT.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “Now you can thoroughly see”)
143. What is Behinat Ohr de Hesed?
It is evaluated as Behinat Ohr Hochma in Kli de Keter. This is because
Hesed has only that He’arat Hochma that the general Ohr Hesed
received while being in Kli de Bina.
Also, everything that if found in the general Ohr Hesed below the Ohr
Hochma that it received, no longer belongs to the Sefirat Hesed, but to
the six lower Sefirot below Hesed. Hence, the Hesed is considered
Behinat Hochma in Kli de Keter, since its Kli is Behinat Keter, as
written in answer 142.
(There)
144. What is the order of the emanation of the Ohr of Gevura?
This is the rule: the coming of the Ohr Hesed to its Kli causes being
Matei in Keter. This is because then the ZON de Bina purified to
Behina Aleph in order to be Panimbe Panim with the Kli of the Hesed.
For this reason the entire Komat Ohr Bina disappeared and four Orot
de HB rose to the Keter. At that time they induced a new Zivug and
Matei in Keter. You find that the Achoraim de Keter returned to its
place as in the beginning, and He’arat GAR was prevented from the
entire Partzuf.
Since the He’arat GAR stopped from the Ohr Hesed, it immediately
becomes needy of its mother Bina in order to suck He’arat GAR from
Kli de Bina. Hence, it rises to Bina and the Kli de Hesed turns its
Panim downward, giving its remains, meaning everything below its
own Behina, to Kli de Gevura.

--- PAGE 189 ---
(There)
145. What is the property of Sefirat Gevura?
Her Kli has the ratio of Hochma to Ohr de Hassadim. This is so
because KHB de Hassadim are called HGT and her Ohr is Behinat
VAK de He’arat Hochma in Hesed, which is as VAK de GAR
compared to the Ohr Hesed.
It is like the Zachar de Kli de Bina, which is the Behinat VAK de GAR
compared to Hochma (see answer 140). Thus, the property of Ohr
Gevura compared to the Ohr Hesed is as the value of ZON de Bina
compared to ZON de Hochma.
This is the meaning of “I am Understanding (Bina), Power (Gevura) is
mine,” since their value is the same and there is no difference between
them, but only in the measure of the Koma; one is Komat Behina Bet,
and the other is Komat Behina Aleph.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “Now we shall explain”)
146. What is the difference between ZON de Bina and Sefirat Gevura?
See above answer 145.
147. What is the order of the emanation of the Ohr Tifferet?
After it returned to being Lo Matei in Keter, its Achoraim were
cancelled on the GAR and ZON de Hochma returned to their place. Kli
de Hochma turned its Panim without Hizdakchut and placed ZON de
Bina to their place. After that ZON de Bina returned to Behina Aleph,
and lowered the Ohr Hesed to its place.
This is because after the He’arat GAR returned to the Partzuf and
Hesed acquired He’arat Hochma, it no longer needs its Ima Bina. At
that time the Ohr Gevura rises to Hesed since when GAR reappears,
its VAK immediately joins with it. In that state Kli de Gevura turns its
Panim downward and places its residue, meaning every thing that is
below Behinat Ohr Gevura, to the Kli Tifferet.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “Now we shall explain the order”)
148. What is the property of the Kli de Tifferet?

--- PAGE 190 ---
Its Kli is Behinat Bina of Ohr de Hassadim. Its Ohr is the Atzmut Ohr
Hesed that was in Kli de Bina. This is because the Orot de Hesed and
Gevura are only He’arot GAR and VAK de Hochma that the Ohr
Hesed received, but the Tifferet is the Etzem of this Ohr of Hassadim.
The value of the Sefira is as the value of the Daat that mates between
Hochma and Bina, since it is Behinat Ohr Hesed in Kli de Bina, which
is the Ohr Daat.
(There)
149. How is the Ohr Hesed different when it is in Bina from when it is
in Tifferet?
The difference is in the value. It is like the difference between the
Lower Daat and the Upper Daat. When Ohr Hesed is in Bina, it unites
the HB into a single Partzuf, in the sense that it receives the He’arat
Hochma from the same time Hochma and Bina returned to the first
Partzuf.
When it is in Tifferet it is in the form of the Lower Daat, uniting all
the Orot Hesed and Gevura into one in the sense that it receives
He’arat Hesed from the same time Gevura rose to Hesed and united
with it into a single Ohr. Because of that beginning, the uniting of
Hochma and Gevura into one has been imprinted in it forever, since it
cannot receive its Shefa from them in another way. It is like Upper
Daat, which cannot receive He’arat Hochma except through Hochma
and Bina to one Partzuf.
(Ohr Pnimi item 41, par. “Now we understand Sefirat Tifferet”)
150. What is Ohr Daat at its Shoresh?
It is a new upshot that emerged during the concealment of the Ohr
Keter from the Partzuf de AB and the replacement of the Orot.
Because the Ohr Hochma clothed in the Kli Keter, Ohr ZA ascended
to clothe in Kli Bina to be emanated by the Hochma.
In so doing, two Behinot Ohr ZA emanated: The first relates to Partzuf
Keter, when the Orot are in their actual place, at which time ZA was
emanated by Bina, clothing in Kelim de VAK. The second relates to

--- PAGE 191 ---
Partzuf Hochma, when the Orot changed their places. At that time the
Ohr ZA was emanated by Hochma, clothing Kelim de GAR, meaning
in Kli de Bina.
Hence, from here on all the Partzufim contain two Behinot ZA in
every Partzuf. The Upper ZA, which acquired a place of GAR, is
called Sefirat Daat, and the Lower ZA, standing in its actual place in
VAK is called ZA.
(Ohr Pnimi item 41, par. “Now we have explained the Ohr Daat”)
151. What is the essence of Behinat ZA in the Hey Ktzavot?
From the perspective of the Ohr, which is the primary, Sefirat Tifferet
is the essence of ZA. This is because the Ohr Tifferet is the Atzmut of
the Ohr Hesed in Kli de Bina. For this reason it is called Vav ו with a
Rosh, as Behinot GAR of Bina rest on it since it was in Kli de Bina.
However, from the perspective of the Kli, it is Sefirat Netzah, being
the fourth tip in the five Ktzavot, opposite the fourth Behina in the Hey
Behinot KHB ZA and Malchut. Thus you find that the ZA in the five
Behinot is opposite the Netzah in the Hey Hassadim.
(There par. “From all”)
152. What are the Behinot RTS in ZAT?
Hesed and Gevura, which are opposite HB, are Behinat Rosh of the
ZAT. Tifferet and Netzah are Behinat Toch of the ZAT. One is from the
perspective of the Ohr, and the other is from the perspective of the Kli
(see answer 151).
Hod, Yesod, Malchut, are the Behinat Sof of the ZAT since Hod is the
fifth tip of the Hey Ktzavot, corresponding to Malchut in the Hey
Behinot, and Yesod and Malchut extended from it.
(There)
153. What is the difference between Hesed and Gevura, and Tifferet?
Hesed and Gevura are not the Etzem Ohr Hesed, but He’arot Hochma
and Bina that reached Hesed when it clothed in the Kli of Bina, but
Tifferet is indeed the essence and the Atzmut of the Ohr Hesed.

--- PAGE 192 ---
(Ohr Pnimi item 41, par. “Therefore, Orot de HGT”)
154. Why is the essence of Ohr Hesed not clothed in the Sefirot of
Hochma and Gevura?
It is because of the property of their Kelim. Kelim de Hesed and
Gevura are Behinat Keter and Hochma, in which the Ohr Hesed has
no Shoresh. This is so because it only clothed the Kli de Bina de GAR
.
For this reason, the Atzmut Ohr Hesed cannot clothe in Behinat Hey
Hassadim too, but in Kli de Tifferet, which is the Bina de Hey
Hassadim, not in Hesed and Gevura, which are Keter and Hochma de
Hey Hassadim.
Ohr Hesed never clothed Keter and Hochma, and therefore the Kelim
de Hesed and Gevura only have He’arot Hochma and Bina that
reached the reception of the Ohr Hesed when it was in Kli de Bina.
Also, the Atzmut Ohr Hesed clothed in Kli de Tifferet.
(There)
155. How is Sefirat Netzah emanated?
When it returns to being Matei in Keter, when the dominion of the
Achoraim de Keter returns as in the beginning and He’arat GAR is
prevented from the entire Partzuf, Ohr Hesed departs to Bina once
more. Its VAK is Matei in Gevura and the Ohr Tifferet too departs and
returns to its Shoresh in the Kli Gevura, its VAK is given to the Kli de
Netzah and Matei in Netzah.
(Ohr Pnimi item 42)
156. What is the attribute of Sefirat Netzah?
The Kli is the Atzmut of ZA since it is the fourth tip, opposite ZA of the
Hey Behinot. Its Ohr is Behinat VAK from the Atzmut of the Ohr ZA,
which is the Ohr Tifferet since after Ohr Tifferet concealed in its
Shoresh in Gevura, Tifferet gave its VAK to Netzah (see answer 155).
(Ohr Pnimi item 42, par. “Now we shall understand Sefirat Netzah”)
157. What is the difference between HGT and NHY?

--- PAGE 193 ---
Even though every Behinat seven lower Sefirot is Behinat VAK, they
still have He’arat GAR in them. Hence, as we discern two Behinot in
GAR, GAR de VAK and VAK de VAK, so we have two Behinot in VAK,
GAR de VAK and VAK de VAK.
This is so because HGT are considered GAR de VAK, and NHY are
VAK de VAK. For this reason NHY are considered outside the Guf, as
they are Behinat Ohr de Hassadim, lacking He’arat Hochma.
The entire sustenance of the Guf is only Ohr Hochma since it is the
Atzmut of the Ohr Elyon. However, it is impossible that NHY will be
completely emptied of He’arat Hochma since they would be
completely cancelled.
Instead, there is a Behinat Reshimo de HGT in them, which means a
minute He’arah, and for this reason the NHY are called Gimel Go
Gimel. It means that the Reshimot of the Sefirot HGT are concealed in
the three Sefirot NHY in a way that suffices for their sustenance.
158. What is the attribute of the Kli de Hod?
The Kli is Behinat Hesed, the fifth of the Hey Hassadim in the Hey
Behinot, meaning Behina Dalet, which is Midatha Din. However, this
is from the aspect of her being incorporated in ZA, and her Ohr is the
remains of Netzah.
However, from the aspect of the Hitkalelut Netzah in Tifferet, the Ohr
Netzah is then incorporated in He’arat GAR too from the Behinat Ohr
Daat that shines in Tifferet. Hence, the Ohr Hod is considered merely
Behinat He’arat GAR de Ohr Daat, and nothing of He’arat GAR de
Hochma and Bina.
This is so because its entire He’arah extends from the connection of
GAR and VAK de Ohr Tifferet, meaning the connection of Netzah with
Tifferet after the He’arat GAR is extended to the Partzuf. You already
know that the Ohr Tifferet is merely the Behinat Ohr Daat, and not
from Hochma and Bina, whose place is in the Kelim de Hesed and
Gevura.
(There)

--- PAGE 194 ---
159. What is Sefirat Yesod?
Its Kli is from Behinat Malchut since it extends from Hod, which is
the Shoresh of Malchut of the Hey Hassadim, and the Ohr in it is
mingled of Din and Rachamim. This is so because it has two Orot:
The first is the remains of the Ohr that Hod gave it, which is Komat
Malchut, which is Behinat Din. The second Ohr is the Hey that
reached from the Zivug de ZON de Bina that the Hod illuminated for
before it purified to Komat Malchut.
(Ohr Pnimi item 45, par. “Thus, the Kli de Yesod”)
160. In which Sefira did Ohr Malchut clothe?
Ohr Malchut clothed in the Kli Yesod. This is because after the Hod
purified from Behina Aleph to Behinat Keter, the Koma educed on that
Masach has only Komat Malchut, and then he gives it to the Kli de
Yesod.
(Ohr Pnimi item 46, par. “That cessation”)
161. What is the Ohr that clothed in Kli Malchut?
The Ohr of the Dalet ד, surrounding the Truncated Vav ו inside the
Hey ה that reached Yesod from Zivug ZON de Bina, is Behinat GAR
without VAK, meaning without Ohr Hassadim. She descended from
Yesod and clothed in Malchut.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “Now we shall explain the Zachar”)
162. What is the ratio between ZON de Hochma and ZON de Bina?
See above answer 140.
163. How many Behinot ZON are there in Hitpashtut Bet?
They are four Behinot ZON: ZON de Kli Keter, ZON de Kli Hochma,
ZON de Kli Bina, and ZON de Kli de Yesod and Malchut.
164. What is the attribute of the four ZON couples of Hitpashtut Bet?
In the first two couples, which are ZON de Keter and ZON de
Hochma, the Zecharim are more important than the Nekevot. This is
because the Zachar de Keter is from Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut, but
the Nekeva is only from Behina Gimel. The Zachar de Kli de Hochma

--- PAGE 195 ---
is only from Behina Gimel, but the Nekeva de Kli de Hochma is from
Behina Bet. Thus, the Zecharim are more important than the Nekevot.
However, in ZON de Kli de Bina, the Nekeva is greater than the
Zachar. This is because the Zachar is Behinat VAK of Hochma and the
Nekeva is Behinat GAR, as she is the Reshimo de Ohr Bina from the
time of Hitpashtut Aleph.
ZON, however, that is in the Kli of Yesod, the Zachar is found to be
greater than the Nekeva since the Zachar is the Truncated Vav inside
the Hey, extending from Zivug Bina. It is given to Yesod from Sefirat
Hod without Hizdakchut, but as mere He’arah, hence it is Behinat
Hassadim de Behina Aleph, and also extends from a higher place than
Zivug ZON de Bina.
Nevertheless, the Nekeva in Yesod is the residue of the Ohr Hod after
its GAR disappeared and after it purified from Behina Aleph to Komat
Malchut. Thus, it is found to be much lower than her Zachar.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “You find that there are four males”)
165. In which Behina did the Zivug stop and the Ohr of Hitpashtut Bet
depart entirely?
When the Ohr Dalet in the Matei in Zivug ZON de Bina to Malchut.
This is because the Masach has been entirely purified from all its
Aviut until it equalized to Behinat Malchut of Rosh, considered that it
rose to the Rosh, to the Maatzil, at which time all the Orot departed
from the Partzuf.
(Ohr Pnimi item 46, par. “This Dalet”)
166. What is the second Behina of Hitpashtut Bet?
It is the Behinat perpetual Matei ve Lo Matei. Every time the Ohr
Matei to Malchut, it immediately returns to be Matei in Keter, Gevura,
Netzah, and Yesod, and Lo Matei in Hochma, Bina, and Hesed,
Tifferet, Hod, and Malchut.
Afterwards, Keter returns to being in Lo Matei, and Matei in Hochma,
Bina, and Hesed, Tifferet, Hod, and Malchut, and Lo Matei in Keter,
Gevura, Netzah, and Yesod, and so on and so forth continually. This

--- PAGE 196 ---
Behinat Hitpashtut of the perpetual Matei ve Lo Matei is called
Partzuf SAG de AK, or Bina de AK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47)
167. How was Partzuf SAG de AK emanated?
When it is Matei in Malchut de AB de AK, which is the Behina Aleph
de Hitpashtut Bet, the Masach purifies entirely, and equalizes with
Malchut of the Rosh, since the Hishtavut Tzura unites the spirituals
into one. This Masach that rose to the Rosh consists of all the
Reshimot of the Sefirot de Hitpashtut Bet.
These are five Orot: ZON de Hochma, Bina, and the Ohr Hesed that
contains ZAT, which are all included in ZON de Keter. However, the
Reshimo de Behina Gimel, which is Behinat Aviut of Hamshacha that
was in Hitpashtut Bet, and is the last Behina here, disappeared like the
last Behina of Partzuf Keter. This is the Behina Dalet that disappeared
in Histalkut Aleph there.
The rule is that the last Behina does not leave a Reshimo, and this
applies to every single Histalkut. Hence, only the Reshimo de Behina
Bet remained here after the second Histalkut.
However, the Behinat Reshimo de Hitlabshut of Behina Gimel
remained as well, as the Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut remained after
Histalkut Aleph. This is so because only the Behinat Hamshacha is
lost from each last Behina, but not the Behinat Hitlabshut.
Hence, these two Reshimot, Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut and Behina
Bet, containing Behinat Hamshacha, caused two Upper Zivugim in the
Rosh. It is similar to the two Zivugim de ZON de Keter after Histalkut
Aleph, because they were incorporated in one another.
In the first Zivug, the Nekeva was incorporated in the Zachar in
Behina Gimel. At that time Komat Eser Sefirot came out nearly in the
Koma of the Upper Hochma. However, they still could not expand and
descend below to the Guf since Behina Gimel is devoid of
Hamshacha.

--- PAGE 197 ---
Afterwards, a second Zivug was made, where the Zachar was
incorporated in the Nekeva in Behina Bet, at which time Eser Sefirot
in Komat Bina extended. Now that she contains Behinat Hamshacha
too, Malchut of this Komat Bina can expand from her and within her
into Eser Sefirot and descend to the Guf.
At that time the above ZON descend to the Kli de Keter of the Guf,
filled with Ohr from the above two Behinot Zivugim, and the perpetual
Matei ve Lo Matei is made in them. Now, every time it is Matei to the
Malchut, they return to the Keter, and this is called Partzuf SAG de
AK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47)
168. What are the ZON of Kelim de KHB?
The ZON de Kelim de KHB of AB de AK are all Behinat YH. The
Zachar de Kli de Keter is Behinat Reshimo de Behina Dalet de
Hitlabshut. Its Ohr extends from the first Zivug in the Rosh, but
consists of the second Zivug of Rosh in the Ohr Hochma as well.
The Nekeva of the Kli de Keter is the Etzem Komat Hochma that
expanded in Partzuf AB. Her Ohr is from the second Zivug of the
Rosh, but she was contained in the first Zivug de Rosh too, in the
Upper Ohr Keter.
In ZON de Kli de Hochma the Zachar is from the Zachar de Keter
after it has purified to Behina Gimel. The Nekeva is from the Nekeva
de Kli de Keter after she has purified to Behina Bet, and the entire
GAR in the Partzuf extends only through these ZON de Hochma.
In ZON de Kli de Bina, the Zachar is born from the Zivug ZON de
Hochma after they inverted the Panim from GAR to He’arat VAK. The
Nekeva is the Behinat Reshimo that remained in Kli de Bina from the
time of the first Histalkut.
(Items 50 and 51)
169. What are the names of ZON de KHB?
They are all called YH.

--- PAGE 198 ---
170. What are the Otiot that designate ZON and the Kelim of KHB?
Each of them is called Ot Yod, filled. The Zachar de Kli de Keter is
called Yod, the Nekeva, Vav, and the Kli de Keter, Dalet. Also, the
Zachar de Hochma is called Yod, the Nekeva, Vav, and the Kli de
Hochma, Dalet.
In Bina, however, there is a difference: the Zachar is called Yod, the
Nekeva is called Dalet, and the Kli does not merit a name, but the Ohr
Hesed in it is called Vav.
(Item 53)
171. How many Behinot are there in Hitpashtut Bet?
Four Behinot ZON, three in KHB one ZON in Yesod.
(Item 54)
172. What is the meaning of Only He’arah, without giving Orot?
It is Ohr that is born by Zivug ZON for the purpose of a lower degree.
However, giving Orot refers to an Ohr that hangs down and descends
from Sefira to Sefira through the Hizdakchut of the Masach.
(Item 35)
173. Why did Hochma illuminate the Vav to Bina before the giving of
the Orot?
It is because giving the seven Orot to the Bina was through
Hizdakchut to Behina Aleph, but the Zachar de Bina that was
emanated by Hochma was in Komat Behina Bet, but in the form of
Achoraim. Hence, it administered it to the Kli Bina only in inverting
of Panim to VAK, before it purified to Behina Aleph.
174. Why did Keter not give the Yod to Hochma from Behinat He’arah?
This is because the Achoraim of the Ohr Keter that stands under
Malchut de Rosh and detains the influence of the Ohr Keter to Kli de
GAR. However, after ZON de Keter purified and the Behinat Ohr
Keter departed to its Shoresh, its Achoraim were cancelled, and their
residue was given to Kli de Hochma, being ZON de Kli of Hochma.
175. When does Hesed need its mother and when does it not?

--- PAGE 199 ---
During the control of the Achoraim de Keter, which prevents He’arat
GAR from the Partzuf and the two Sefirot Hochma and Bina are
without Ohr, there is no He’arat GAR in Hesed. For this reason it
needs its Ima Bina and rises to her to suck GAR from the place of
Bina.
However, when Matei in the two Sefirot Hochma and Bina, there is
He’arat GAR in the Partzuf, and Hesed has He’arat Hochma. At that
time it does not need its mother and can come down to its own degree.
(Ohr Pnimi item 39, Sub Header “The seven sons”)
176. Why does Bina rise to Hochma before it gives the Ohr Hesed to Kli
de Hesed?
Because of the manifestation of He’arat GAR in Kli de Hochma. As
the Gadlut illuminated to the Hesed, so it extended the ZON de Bina
to it and united with them into one Partzuf. Then Bina purified from
Behina Bet to Behina Aleph in order to be Panim be Panim with the
Kli Hesed, and placed the Ohr Hesed there.
177. How did the Hey de Zivug ZON of Bina reach the Kli Malchut?
Bina purified from Behina Bet to Behina Aleph to give the Ohr Hesed
to the Kli de Hesed. At that time it placed the Hey that was born of her
Zivug along with the Ohr Hesed there. Hesed gave to Gevura in Only
He’arah before it departed to Kli de Bina, Gevura to Tifferet etc. until
it reached her place to Yesod. He took the Vav in her and gave the
Dalet to Malchut.
(Item 44, and Ohr Pnimi there)
178. What is the difference between the Ohr Hesed and the Hey from
Zivug ZON de Bina?
Ohr Hesed is Behinat Ohr Panim. Its He’arah is from the Behinat
Panim of Hochma, and the beginning of its emanation was also
through ZON de Hochma. However, the Hey is from Behinat
Achoraim since she was emanated by ZON de Kli of Bina, which are
Behinat VAK de Hochma.

--- PAGE 200 ---
Yet, she contains Behinat GAR from Reshimo de Bina, though these
GAR are dark since they are from Behinat Histalkut, hence, they are
subordinate to the VAK of the Zachar.
(Ohr Pnimi item 43, par. “Now we can thoroughly understand”)
179. How is the Hey separated into two separated degrees?
When He’arat GAR returns to the Partzuf and Matei in Hod, the Ohr
Yesod departed and rose to its Shoresh to He’arat GAR in Hod. Then
the Truncated Vav rose along with it when they are united in one
another, and the Ohr of the Dalet descended to the Malchut.
(Ohr Pnimi item 46, par. “The meaning of the words”)
180. Why can’t the Ohr Hesed be a Zachar to Bina?
Since the difference between VAK and GAR is great, it is utterly
impossible that the Ohr Hesed, which is complete VAK, will be a
Zachar to Behinat Bina, which is GAR.
(Ohr Pnimi item 51)
181. Why can’t the Ohr Hesed be a Nekeva to Bina?
Because the Ohr Hesed, which is ZA, is a Zachar at its origin de Ohr
Yashar, and a Zachar does not become a Nekeva. In addition, their
VAK and GAR cannot be in one degree.
(There)
182. Which Ohr descended to complement the Malchut?
Ot Dalet of the Hey de Zivug ZON de Bina complemented the Malchut
de AB, which does not have an Ohr.
(Item 54)
183. What are the ZON in Yesod?
The Vav of the Hey de Zivug Bina that descended to the Yesod is the
Zachar of Yesod, and the Ohr Malchut that received from the remains
of Hod, which is the Nekeva.
(Item 54)

--- PAGE 201 ---
184. How did the Reshimo de Kli de Bina, which is GAR, become a
Nekeva to the Yod that was born from the Zivug ZON de Hochma,
which is VAK?
When she is only Behinat Reshimo that remained from the time of
Histalkut Aleph, and she is without Ohr, she therefore equalizes with
the Zachar that extends from the Zivug ZON de Hochma, which is
filled with Ohr.
(Ohr Pnimi item 46, par. “However, here we must know”)
185. What are the five Hassadim and five Gevurot in the five Ktzavot?
Two Orot contain all the degrees. These are Ohr Hochma and Ohr
Hassadim. Hence, the Hey Behinot, called KHB, ZA, and Malchut, are
called by these names only when they are Ohr Hochma. However,
when they are Ohr de Hassadim they are called Hey Ktzavot. This is
so when they have Komat Ohr de Behina Aleph, but, when they have
only Ohr Malchut, they are called Hey Gevurot.
(Ohr Pnimi item 60)
186. What are the five Hassadim and five Gevurot in Yesod?
There are two Orot in Yesod: One is the Behinat Truncated Vav,
extending from Zivug ZON de Bina, and the other is the Behinat Ohr
Malchut. It comes to it from the residue of the Hod after it purified
from the Behina Aleph in it to Komat Malchut.
The five Hassadim were divided into two Behinot from this
Hizdakchut, Komat Behina Aleph, and Komat Malchut. They are
called Hey Hassadim when they are in Komat Behina Aleph, and they
are called Hey Gevurot when they are in Komat Malchut.
Since Yesod received the Komat Malchut, it follows that Yesod
received all Hey Gevurot together. It turns out that all Hey Ktzavot are
incorporated in it in the Behinat Hey Gevurot that came to it from the
remains of the Hod after it diminished to Komat Malchut.
For this reason the Yesod is called the general Hey Ktzavot, as they are
all in it in the form of Gevurot. However, these five Gevurot in Yesod

--- PAGE 202 ---
are sweetened in the Ohr Hassadim of the Truncated Vav that it
received from ZON de Bina.
It received this Vav from Hod before it purified into Komat Malchut,
hence it is still in a measure of Koma of Behina Aleph. Thus, the five
Gevurot in Yesod are sweetened in the Ohr Hassadim in this Vav. It
follows that only in Yesod are there five Hassadim and five Gevurot
sweetened together.
(Ohr Pnimi item 46, par. “The meaning of the words”)
187. What is Matei in Keter de Hitpashtut Bet?
Two Komot: nearly Komat Keter and Komat Hochma, called ZON.
They were extended by two Zivugim de Malchut of the Rosh,
expanded and descended to Kli de Keter de Partzuf AB, called
Hitpashtut Bet. They contain all the Sefirot below them in this Partzuf.
(Ohr Pnimi item 35, par. “Thus, the Zivugim”)
188. Why is it that when Matei in Keter, Lo Matei in Hochma and Bina?
Because the Ohr Achoraim of the Ohr Keter that remained in the Rosh
and did not return to the Guf prevent He’arat GAR from the Partzuf.
Hence, as long as its Reshimo shines by the force of its He’arah in Kli
de Keter, you find that it is Lo Matei in Hochma and Bina, as they are
from Behinat He’arat GAR.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “We must understand that”)
189. Why is it that when Matei in Hochma, Lo Matei in Bina?
Since the Orot de Bina are only VAK that were emanated by the
Achoraim de Hochma when it turned its Panim downward. Thus,
when de Matei in Hochma and the Panimde Kli de Hochma returned
to its place as in the beginning, ZON de Bina instantly returned to their
Behinat GAR, to the Kli de Hochma.
It is because the VAK and the GAR that come from one degree are
difference from each other, but by a reason that compels them to.
Hence, when the reason is cancelled they immediately return to their
place.

--- PAGE 203 ---
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “However, in order to procreate”)
190. Why is it that when Matei in Bina, Lo Matei in Hesed?
This is because Bina cannot dispense the Ohr Hesed before she is
purified to Behina Aleph and before she turns her Panim downward.
For this inversion of the Panim, the Ohr Bina must leave the Kli de
Bina and Lo Matei in Bina. Hence, as much as it is Matei in Bina, it is
Lo Matei in Hesed.
(Ohr Pnimi item 39, Sub Header “At that time”)
191. What is Matei in Hesed and in Tifferet?
Ohr de Hassadim in He’arat Hochma Matei to Kli de Hesed and Ohr
He’arat Hochma alone is ascribed to the Hesed. It gives to Gevura
anything below this He’arat Hochma, and the Ohr Hassadim in its
Atzmut with He’arat GAR through the return of Gevura to Hesed is
Matei to Kli de Tifferet.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “Now you can thoroughly see”, and Ohr
Pnimi item 42, par. “Now we shall understand Sefirat Netzah”)
192. What is Matei in Keter Partzuf SAG de AK?
Two Komot. These are nearly Komat Hochma, and Komat Bina. They
are called ZON for they were extended by two Zivugim in Malchut of
the Rosh that expanded and descended from there to the Kli de Keter
de Partzuf SAG.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “Let us explain the four couples”)
193. What is Matei in Hochma de SAG de AK?
ZON de Kli de Hochma de SAG were emanated by the inversion of the
Panim de Kli de Keter. They are considered Behinat VAK de ZON de
Keter. However, any He’arat GAR in Partzuf Bina comes from these
ZON, which is because of the Reshimo de Ohr Bina that remained in
the Kli Hochma from the time of Hitpashtut Bet. The value of these
ZON de Hochma is similar to the value of ZON de Bina of Partzuf AB.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “Now we shall explain the Zachar”)
194. What is Matei in Bina de SAG de AK?

--- PAGE 204 ---
They contain the Reshimot de Kli Bina of Partzuf AB and receive their
He’arah from ZON de Kli de Hochma.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “Now we shall explain the Zachar”)
195. What is Matei in Hesed de SAG de AK?
The Ohr Hassadim in He’arat Bina and the Hey from Zivug ZON de
Kli de Hochma.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “We could say”)
196. What is Matei in Hod and not Matei in Yesod de SAG de AK?
When de Matei He’arat GAR to the Kli de Hod, Ohr Yesod returns to
it, which is Behinat VAK of that Ohr.
(There)
197. Why is it that when Matei in Keter, Gevura, Netzah, and Yesod, Lo
Matei Hochma, Bina and Hesed, Tifferet, Hod, and Malchut de
SAG de AK?
Because the Ohr Hochma that remained in the Rosh and did not return
to this Hitpashtut de SAG turns its Achoraim to its Anafim in Kli de
Keter. Because of these Achoraim de Hochma, ZON de Keter cannot
dispense Behinat GAR to the Partzuf.
Hence, when the Ohr Matei in Keter, He’arat GAR is prevented from
the entire Partzuf and only the Kelim de Behinat VAK shine, which are
Gevura, Netzah, and Yesod. It is Lo Matei in Hochma, Bina, and
Hesed, Tifferet, Hod, and Malchut, since their Panim are Behinat
GAR.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “Now we shall explain the order”)
198. Why is it that when Matei in Hochma, Bina, and Hesed, Tifferet,
Hod, and Malchut, Lo Matei in Keter, Gevura, Netzah, and Yesod de
SAG de AK?
This is because each Sefira where He’arat GAR is Matei, its VAK,
being in the Sefira below it, instantaneously return to it. When Matei
in Hochma and Bina, He’arat GAR returns to the Partzuf and Matei in
Hesed. Thus, its VAK in Gevura return to it. At that time Matei in

--- PAGE 205 ---
Tifferet and VAK de Netzah return to it and Matei in Hod and VAK in
Yesod return to Hod, and Matei in Malchut.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “We could say”)
199. Why is it that when Matei in Malchut de SAG de AK, it returns to
being Matei in Keter, and so on and so forth?
This is because the reason for the Hizdakchut of the Masach de
Behina Bet is because this Masach relies on the Achoraim de Bina,
which stop the Hochma, as the Yod, Nun de Tzadik, which are opposite
to one another. These Achoraim de Bina depend on a reason. They are
not from Bina herself since Bina is Atzmut Hochma and these
Achoraim of hers is because Bina de Ohr Yashar craves Hassadim, as
it is written, “because He delighteth in mercy.”
Hence, in order to be able to extend Hassadim, she turned her
Achoraim to the Ohr Hochma. Thus you find that the lack of
Hassadim is the reason for the Achoraim de Bina.
It follows, that when the Zivug was made on the Masach de Behina
Bet and the Ohr is poured to the Partzuf, Bina already has an
abundance of Ohr Hassadim. At that time the Achoraim de Ima are
cancelled since she did not prefer the Ohr Hassadim to the Ohr
Hochma, but when she was devoid of Hassadim.
However, once she has Hassadim abundantly, she turns herself back to
the Ohr Hochma, canceling her Achoraim. At that time the Masach
that relies on her Achoraim is purified too, as its force of detainment
weakens, though it does not purify instantaneously, but gradually.
First it is Lo Matei in Keter, Matei in Hochma and Bina, and He’arat
GAR returns to the Partzuf. This He’arah was by inversion of the
Panim and not by Hizdakchut.
Afterwards, ZON de Keter purified from Behina Gimel and Behina
Bet to Behina Bet and Behina Aleph. The Ohr Hesed was given to the
Kli of Hochma, and from there to the Kelim de VAK, and the Kelim de
Panim illuminated. These are Hesed, Tifferet, Hod, and Malchut.

--- PAGE 206 ---
In other words, it is in the form of Matei ve Lo Matei as it was in
Partzuf AB, until the Ohr reached Malchut. At that time the Masach
purified and all the Ohr stopped from the Partzuf. The Masach that
consists of all the Reshimot rises to the Kli of Keter and Bina feels a
lack of Hassadim once more.
For this reason she returns her Achoraim to Hochma and the Masach
de Behina Bet recovers as in the beginning. Once again it draws the
Koma of Behina Bet to the Keter and the Ohr Hassadim returns to fill
the Partzuf abundantly. At that time Bina cancels her Achoraim and
the Masach weakens once more, and so on and so forth continuously.
(Ohr Pnimi item 47, par. “The reason for it”)
200. Why does the Masach de Behina Bet rely on the Achoraim de
Bina?
Because indeed, there is only Kli Malchut here. The Tzimtzum and the
Masach do not apply to any Behina of the Upper nine at all. The
whole issue of the Masach that rose to the first Behinot was only
because of the ascent and the Hizdakchut Behinat Malchut that
equalized them in her measure of Aviut.
Hence, when the Masach rose to Bina, it means that it acquired
Behinat Achoraim de Bina to its Behinat detainment on the Malchut
that rose there. However, afterwards, in the Partzufim below this
Partzuf SAG, the Behinat Malchut already mingled with the Etzem of
the first nine Sefirot in a way that the Behinat Tzimtzum itself rests on
them. In that state the Masach does not rely on the Achoraim de Bina,
but the force of the Tzimtzum itself rests on it, even in Masach de
Behina Aleph.
201. Why are the Eser Sefirot de Rosh always called GAR, and the Eser
Sefirot de Guf named “The Seven Lower Sefirot”?
You see in the order of the concatenation of the Partzuf that the Ohr
Keter of the Partzuf Elyon remains concealed in the Rosh. it does not
return to the Partzuf Tachton. This is so because the Ohr Keter of

--- PAGE 207 ---
Partzuf Keter de AK did not return to Partzuf AB de AK and Keter de
Partzuf AB received only Behinat VAK from it.
Also, the Keter de Partzuf AB remained concealed and did not return
to Partzuf SAG de AK. Keter de Partzuf SAG receives only VAK from
it, and so on in all the Partzufim.
It is known the gist of the Partzuf is discerned only by the Upper
Sefira. since the Partzuf Tachton has only VAK of the Upper Sefira, all
of it is therefore considered as VAK with respect to the Elyon.
Also, you know that these GAR of the Upper Sefira that are missing to
the Tachton remained standing in the Rosh under Malchut of the Rosh.
Ohr Keter that is missing in Partzuf AB remained there under the
Malchut of the Rosh, and Ohr Keter de AB that did not return to
Partzuf AB remained standing under the Malchut of the Rosh.
Thus, the whole difference between the Rosh and the Guf is only in
the GAR, as VAK reach the Guf by the Keter de Guf that receives VAK
from the Ohr Keter that remains in the Rosh. For this reason we called
every Rosh, GAR, and the Guf, VAK or ZAT, since that is the whole
difference between them.
202. Why is every Partzuf Tachton considered Behinat VAK with
respect to its Elyon?
This has already been explained above in answer 201.
Each Tachton lacks the GAR of the Upper Sefira de Elyon. For this
reason it is considered VAK de Elyon, as the gist of the Partzuf is the
highest Sefira in it. This is with respect to the Elyon, but in itself, it
has the entire Eser Sefirot.
For example, Partzuf AB has He’arat VAK de Keter of the Partzuf
Keter, hence it is considered VAK. However, for itself, the highest
Sefira in it is Hochma, not Keter, and he has complete GAR de
Hochma. Also, Partzuf Bina has VAK of the Upper Sefira de Partzuf
AB, which is Hochma, but it has complete GAR from its own highest
Sefira, and it is likewise in all of them.

--- PAGE 208 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 209 ---
T Q M
ABLE OF UESTIONS FOR THE EANING
W
OF THE ORDS
1. What is A Thin and Frail Ohr?
2. What is a Selected Ohr?
3. What is a Renewed Ohr?
4. What are First Orot?
5. What is Achor?
6. What are Alephin?
7. What is Et?
8. What are Two Distances?
9. What is Only He’arah?
10. What is Habata?
11. What are Hey ה Hey ה?
12. What are the Heyin?
13. What is a Preparation to Receive?
14. What is a Histaklut through Achor?
15. What is Histalkut Aleph?
16. What is Histalkut Bet?
17. What is Inversion of the Panim Downward?
18. What is Hitkalelut?
19. What is Hitpashtut Aleph?
20. What is Hitpashtut Bet?
21. What are Yodin?

--- PAGE 210 ---
22. What are Ten Exits and Ten Entrances?
23. What are YV?
24. What is The Descent of the Degree?
25. What is Generality?
26. What is Keter de Shorashim?
27. What is Keter de Anafim?
28. What is Matei ve Lo Matei?
29. What is A Filling?
30. What is Malchut de Shorashim?
31. What is A Giving of Orot?
32. What is the meaning of Histalkut?
33. What are the Anafim of the Peh?
34. What are Panim?
35. What are Panim and Achor de Kli?
36. What are Panim and Achor de Masach?
37. What is Pashut (lit. Simple) without Filling?
38. What Needs its Mother?
39. What is Reiah of the Eynaim?
40. What are the Shorashim of the Sefirot?
41. What is Shoresh Above?
42. What are Shorashim Elyonim?

--- PAGE 211 ---
1. What is A Thin and Frail Ohr?
The Komat Ohr extending on a Masach of Aviut de Behina Aleph is
called “A Thin and Frail Ohr”, as it does not extend anything of
Behinat GAR.
(Item 29 and Ohr Pnimi there)
2. What is a Selected Ohr?
Two Behinot Orot are contained in each Reshimo: the first is a residue
of Ohr Yashar; the second is a residue of Ohr Hozer that a residue of
Ohr Yashar is clothed in it. The part of the Ohr Yashar of the Reshimo
is called “Selected Ohr”, and the part of the Ohr Hozer of the Reshimo
is called the “Inferior Ohr” in it.
(Item 50 and Ohr Pnimi there)
3. What is a Renewed Ohr?
The Ohr extended by a Zivug de Hakaa, which comes to the Partzuf,
is called “Renewed Ohr”. The Orot that exist in the Partzuf from the
time of Hitpashtut Aleph, being the Reshimot that the Orot left there
after their departure, are called “First Orot”.
(Item 52)
4. What are First Orot?
See answer No. 3.
5. What is Achor?
A Behina that does not operate in the Kli, whether for bestowal or for
reception, is called Achor, or Achoraim.
(Item 15 and Ohr Pnimi there)
6. What are Alephin?
A measure of Koma educed primarily on Aviut de Behina Aleph is
called HaVaYaH de Alephin.
(Item 56 and Ohr Pnimi Sub Header “In Yodin”)
7. What is Et?

--- PAGE 212 ---
Malchut is called Et. It implies that it contains the alphabet from
Aleph to Tav. It is so because the Malchut is the Shoresh of the
twenty-two Otiot, and for this reason they are called Otiot.
(Item 30 and Ohr Pnimi)
8. What are Two Distances?
If there are two distances without Ohr between a Kli de Hesed and a
Kli de Keter, meaning when HB are empty of Ohr, the He’arat GAR is
prevented from the Partzuf.
(Item 40)
9. What is Only He’arah?
A giving of Orot in the Sefirot from one to another is through the
Hizdakchut of the Masach. First, all the Orot contained in Masach de
Behina Gimel come to Kli de Keter.
After the Aviut de Behina Gimel is purified to Behina Bet, whose
Koma is unsuitable for Keter, it gives it to Hochma. Also, after Behina
Bet purifies to Behina Aleph, and that Koma is unfit for Hochma, it
gives it to Bina, etc. similarly.
There is a Behina of giving of Orot from Sefira to Sefira through a
Zivug and procreation, and this is called He’arah, not “Giving of
Orot”.
(Item 35)
10. What is Habata?
Receiving or giving of a Sefira from another is called Habata, since
they look at each other.
(Item 15 and Ohr Pnimi, sub header “Parts”)
11. What are Hey ה Hey ה?
The general Histalkut de Hitpashtut Aleph is called “The First Hey” of
the name HaVaYaH, and the general Histalkut of Hitpashtut Bet is
called “The Last Hey de HaVaYaH”.
(Item 25 and Ohr Pnimi, par. “We understand”)

--- PAGE 213 ---
12. What are the Heyin?
The measure of the Koma of Behinat Malchut is called HaVaYaH in
filling of Heyin.
(Item 56 and Ohr Pnimi Sub Header “In Yodin”)
13. What is a Preparation to Receive?
When there is a corrected Masach in the Partzuf at a suitable measure
of Aviut fit for a Zivug and to extend the Ohr Elyon, the Partzuf is then
considered to have a “Preparation to Receive” the Ohr Elyon.
(Ohr Pnimi, item 6, sub header “Preparation”)
14. What is a Histaklut through Achor?
When the Kli de Panim is cancelled and still receives through its
Achoraim, such as after the Aviut de Behina Dalet has been cancelled,
and it receives He’arah de Behina Gimel from its upper Behina into
its Behina Gimel, it is considered to be looking at the Ohr Elyon
through its Achoraim. This is because Behina Gimel is considered
Achor with respect to Behina Dalet.
See Panim and Achor de Masach.
(Ohr Pnimi, item 15, sub header “It looks”)
15. What is Histalkut Aleph?
It is the Histalkut Orot to the Maatzil that was made in the Olamot for
the first time, which is in Partzuf Keter de AK.
(Item 60)
16. What is Histalkut Bet?
It is the second Histalkut that was made in the Olamot, which is
Partzuf Hochma de AK.
(There)
17. What is Inversion of the Panim Downward?
The more Av in the wall of the Kli is called Panim because the Zivug
Elyon is made on it and the Ohr extends through it, but the part that is
not so Av, is called Achor since it does not operate in the Kli. If the

--- PAGE 214 ---
Ohr Pnimi departs from the Kli and the Kli receives Ohr from a low
Koma, and this Koma is suitable to the measure of the Aviut in this Kli,
that Ohr will be received in the part that is not so Av, suitable for that
Koma.
It turns out that it now turned its Panim downward, the Av part in the
Kli has been cancelled and its Achoraim are upward, as the Achor part
of the Kli has now become the receiver of the Ohr.
If, for example, the Kli is of Behina Dalet, the Ohr Pnimi de Behina
Dalet has departed, and the Kli receives Ohr from its adjacent Behina
Gimel. Thus, the Kli receives only in the part that is not so Av, called
the Achor of the Kli, meaning in the Aviut de Behina Gimel found
there.
You find that the Achor has become the Panim of the Kli, and the
previous measure of Panim in it is cancelled. It is now completely
inoperative in the Kli; and this is considered turning its Panim
downward.
(Ohr Pnimi, item 15, sub header “At that time”)
18. What is Hitkalelut?
Sometimes, two Orot from two Behinot can incorporate and unite with
one another and receive He’arah from one another like one Behina. It
can be depicted in three ways:
• Either they are both without Kelim, meaning ZON that rise to the
Rosh and incorporate there in both Zivugim;
• or they are both in two Kelim, meaning in Hitpashtut Bet when
ZON are incorporated there in He’arat Keter and Hochma when
they are in two Kelim de Behinat Keter;
• or in the second Behina of Hitpashtut, called Partzuf Bina de AK,
where ZON de Keter have only one Kli there and receive He’arah
from each other.
(Item 25 and Ohr Pnimi, par. “However”)
19. What is Hitpashtut Aleph?

--- PAGE 215 ---
Hitpashtut indicates a descent of the Ohr from above downward to
Hitlabshut in the Kelim. Any Hitpashtut is called Guf, and Hitpashtut
Aleph refers to the Guf de Partzuf Keter de AK, which is the first Guf
in the Olamot.
20. What is Hitpashtut Bet?
This is the Guf of Partzuf Hochma de AK, called Partzuf AB de AK.
There is another, second Behina of Hitpashtut Bet, which is Partzuf
Bina de AK, called Partzuf SAG de AK.
21. What are Yodin?
The measure of Aviut of Behina Gimel and Behina Bet is named Yodin.
(Item 56 and Ohr Pnimi Sub Header “In Yodin”)
22. What are Ten Exits and Ten Entrances?
When the Orot entered in the Kelim of Hitpashtut Bet, they came by
way of Matei ve Lo Matei. In the beginning they all came to Keter.
After they are Lo Matei in Keter, they came in Hochma. After they are
Lo Matei in Hochma, they came in Bina etc. similarly. Thus, the Orot
made ten exits and ten entrances until the Ohr reached Malchut.
(Item 22)
23. What are YV?
Yod implies the Behinat Nekudim of Hitpashtut Aleph, meaning the
Hitpashtut Orot from Hochma down, which is found there. The Vav
implies the Behinot Nekudim de Hitpashtut Bet, which is also from
Hochma downward. However, there is no insinuation for the Ohr
Keter de Hitpashtut Aleph and Hitpashtut Bet in the four Otiot
HaVaYaH.
24. What is The Descent of the Degree?
In Hitpashtut Bet, Ohr Keter did not return there, but remained in the
Peh. Hence, Ohr Hochma came and clothed in Kli de Keter, and Ohr
Bina in Kli de Hochma etc. It follows, that Keter descended to the
degree of Hochma, and Hochma descended to the degree of Bina etc.
(Item 10)

--- PAGE 216 ---
25. What is Generality?
When the Zachar and Nekeva receive He’arah from each other, it is
called “Generality”. There are three kinds of Generality:
1. When they are without Kelim, meaning when they ascend to Malchut
de Rosh;
2. When they are in two Kelim, when he is in AB;
3. When they are in one Kli, which is in SAG.
(See Hitkalelut)
26. What is Keter de Shorashim?
The Eser Sefirot of the Rosh are considered Shorashim of the Eser
Sefirot of the Guf, and Keter de Rosh is Keter de Shorashim.
(Item 3)
27. What is Keter de Anafim?
The Ohr Keter of the Eser Sefirot de Guf is called Keter of the Anafim.
(There)
28. What is Matei ve Lo Matei?
Matei indicates the Hitpashtut Ohr Elyon to the Sefira; Lo Matei
indicates Histalkut of the Ohr from the Sefira.
29. What is A Filling?
The measure of the Aviut in the Masach in the Kli, that the Zivug
Elyon is made on is called “Filling”, since it is the cause of the filling
of the Kli with Ohr.
(Item 56)
30. What is Malchut de Shorashim?
The Malchut of the Rosh is called Malchut of the Shorashim, since
every Eser Sefirot de Rosh are called Shorashim.
(Item 3)
31. What is A Giving of Orot?

--- PAGE 217 ---
The matter of the giving of Orot from Sefira to Sefira is through the
Hizdakchut of the Masach. First, all the Orot came to Kli de Keter.
When Behina Gimel of the Keter purified to Behina Bet, she gave the
Orot to Hochma.
When Aviut de Hochma purified from Behina Bet to Behina Aleph, she
gave the Orot to the Kli de Bina etc. similarly, until the Ohr reached
Malchut.
There is another matter of the administration of the Orot born by a
Zivug and given from one Sefira to another. These are called “Only
He’arot” (see Only He’arah).
(Item 37 and Ohr Pnimi, sub header “Any”)
32. What is the meaning of Histalkut?
There is a Behinat Reshimo, whose Ohr is going to return to the
Partzuf, and there is Behinat Reshimo, whose Ohr will never again
return to the Partzuf. For this reason it is considered to be in the form
of Histalkut, meaning that the Ohr that departed from it will not return
to the Partzuf.
(Item 59)
33. What are the Anafim of the Peh?
Eser Sefirot de Guf are a Hitpashtut Malchut of the Rosh. This is
because Malchut de Rosh expands from her and comes to the Eser
Sefirot from above downward, which are called Guf. Hence, the Sefira
de Guf, are found to be the Anafim of the Peh, which is Malchut de
Rosh.
(Item 1)
34. What are Panim?
The place of the designated Kli for bestowal or reception is called
Panim.
35. What are Panim and Achor de Kli?
Each Kli is designated for dispensing of GAR, or dispensing of VAK. If
the Kli dispenses GAR, then the place of the administration of GAR is

--- PAGE 218 ---
its Panim, and the place of the administration of VAK is its Achor. If
the Kli dispenses VAK, the place of the administration of VAK is its
Panim, and the administration of GAR is its Achor.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “The meaning of”)
36. What are Panim and Achor de Masach?
The thickest Behina in the Masach is the side of its Panim, and the
Behina that is not so Av is the Behinat Achor in it.
(Ohr Pnimi item 15, par. “You already know”)
37. What is Pashut (lit. Simple) without Filling?
When the Masach purifies from its Aviut, the Zivug stops from it, the
Ohr departs from the Kli, and the Otiot are considered to be without
filling. This is because the Kelim are the Otiot and the filling is the
measure of the Aviut in the Masach. Since it purified from the Aviut, it
lacks the filling.
(Item 58)
38. What Needs its Mother?
Ohr Hesed in Kli de Bina is considered a “Thin and Frail Ohr”. This is
because it is from Behinat Zivug de Aviut de Behina Aleph, in which
there is no He’arat GAR, being the Atzmut and sustenance of any Ohr.
Hence, it must remain in the Kli de Bina as long as it does not attain
He’arat Hochma, so as to suck GAR from Behinat Kli de Bina. This is
why it is considered needing its mother, meaning Bina. When it attains
He’arat Hochma, it is considered to have attained its Gadlut and does
not need its mother Bina anymore.
(Item 39 and Ohr Pnimi, sub header “The seven sons”)
39. What is Reiah of the Eynaim?
The Ohr Elyon that expands for Zivug de Hakaa is called Reiah, from
the verse, “And God saw the light, that it was good.” It implies to Ohr
Hochma, which is the Atzmut of the Ohr Yashar that expands from Ein
Sof.
(Item 30)

--- PAGE 219 ---
40. What are the Shorashim of the Sefirot?
The Reshimo that her Ohr will not return to the Partzuf. For example,
the Ohr Keter remains concealed under the Malchut of the Rosh and
does not descend back to the Guf in Hitpashtut Bet, but only its
Reshimo operates in Kli de Keter in its place. That Ohr Keter that
remained above is considered a permanent Shoresh there, shining
from there to its Reshimo.
(Item 59)
41. What is Shoresh Above?
Eser Sefirot de Rosh are considered the Shorashim of the Eser Sefirot
de Guf.
(Item 9)
42. What are Shorashim Elyonim?
These are the Eser Sefirot de Rosh (see item 40).
(Item 40)
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 220 ---
PART SIX
The Eser Sefirot of Olam ha Nekudim
1. * 3
2. 6
3. 7
4. 9
5. 10
6. 10
7. * 14
8. 17
9. * 17
10. 18
11. * 19
12. 19
13. 20
14. 21
15. 23
16. 23
17. * 24
18. 24
19. 25
20. 26
21. 28
22. 29

--- PAGE 221 ---
23. 29
24. 32
25. * 33
26. 34
27. 39
28. 39
29. 41
30. 41
31. * 42
32. * 45
33. 46
34. 47
35. * 47
36. 47
37. * 47
38. * 47
39. 48
40. * 49
41. * 50
42. 51
43. 52
44. * 52
45. 55
46. 56
47. 56
48. 57
49. 59
50. 59

--- PAGE 222 ---
51. 60
52. 60
53. 61
54. 61

--- PAGE 223 ---
1. *AK contains AB SAG MA BON in its Atzmut. Each of these four
consists of all four and Orot stem from it, which are its Anafim.
The AB is in its Mochin and corresponds to AA and Abba de
Atzilut.
It contains a model of Behinat Atik de Atzilut Above its Galgalta.
Its SAG is from Awzen down to its Tabur, corresponding to Bina de
Atzilut, and its MA and BON are from its Tabur down,
corresponding to ZON de Atzilut.
Ohr Pnimi
1. AK contains.
This study that I’ve begun with is the most profound of all the Rav’s
lessons regarding Olam ha Nekudim, and should have been presented
at the end of the part. However, in this section the Rav gave us the key
by which he explains all the future issues before us in the Eser Sefirot
de Nekudim. Hence, the reader must know and remember it well
before examining the concepts themselves.
First, we must know which of the Partzufim of AK the Rav refers to in
this case, as we know that there are five Partzufim in AK. However,
the Rav has already notified us that in the first two Partzufim of AK,
namely Partzuf Keter de AK and Partzuf AB de AK, we have no
permission to speak.
The study begins only in Partzuf SAG, from Behinat Awzen down,
meaning its Koma (level) is only up to Bina, as Bina de Rosh is called
Awzen. That teaches us that the Rav speaks of Partzuf SAG de AK
here, and the details and matters elucidated before us revolve only
around that Partzuf.
He says that it contains AB SAG MA BON in its Atzmut, which are the
four Komot that come out over the above four Behinot. These are
Behina Gimel, extending Komat (Koma of) Hochma, called HaVaYaH
de AB, Behina Bet, extending Komat Bina, called HaVaYaH de SAG,
Behina Aleph, extending Komat ZA, called HaVaYaH de MA, and

--- PAGE 224 ---
Komat Malchut, called BON. Each of them contains all four, as he
explains henceforth.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
They are called Se’arot Reisha and Se’arot Dikna, emanated from this
Rosh de SAG de AK. Indeed, know that everything said here is but
Shorashim to the items in Olam Atzilut. Although they are not
operative here, they are nonetheless rooted here.
The AB is in its Mochin.
Here we must remember everything that’s been explained regarding
the emanation of the first three Partzufim of AK, very briefly
explained in the Rav’s words in Part Five. He calls the first Partzuf of
AK “Hitpashtut Aleph”, Partzuf AB de AK “Hitpashtut Bet”, and
Partzuf SAG de AK “The second Behina of Hitpashtut Bet”. We must
generally remember all the words brought by the Rav there, and
everything explained there in Ohr Pnimi, for I will not repeat anything
here, only use the names.
You already know that every Tachton clothes its Elyon only from the
Peh down, meaning from the place it is rooted and where it emerges,
which is the Malchut of the Rosh of its Elyon. This is where the
Tachton emerges.
Hence, Keter of Rosh de SAG is called Awzen because Ohr Bina,
called Awzen clothes the Kli de Keter. He, in turn, clothes his Partzuf
Elyon, called AB, from the Peh down.
Know, that this Guf de AB, clothed in Rosh de SAG, becomes a
Neshama and Mochin to the Rosh de SAG. It is written, “The AB is in
its Mochin, and corresponds to AA and Abba de Atzilut.” It is so
because Guf AB, clothed in Rosh de SAG, are Behinat Mochin to the
Rosh de SAG.
Corresponds to AA and Abba de Atzilut.
AA is AB de MA in Atzilut, and Abba is AB de BON in Atzilut, where
the five Partzufim de MA and the five Partzufim de BON join together.

--- PAGE 225 ---
It is written that Behinat Guf de AB clothed in Rosh de SAG is
equivalent to AA and Abba de Atzilut.
Know, that this study explains the equivalence of the five Partzufim de
SAG de AK with the five Partzufim in Atzilut. This is in order to know
how to deduce from one regarding the other, and how the branches
connect and concatenate from their Shorashim. It is also to study the
Elyon through the Tachton, and this is immeasurably beneficial.
A model of Behinat Atik de Atzilut.
Partzuf Keter de Atzilut is called Atik. He says that above Partzuf AB
de AK there is another (first) Partzuf, meaning Partzuf Keter de AK,
corresponding to Partzuf Atik in Atzilut.
Its SAG is from Awzen down to its Tabur.
Partzuf SAG de AK, whose Koma reaches Bina, is called Awzen.
Everything spoken here stems from it, and completes and ends on the
Tabur. We must thoroughly understand the essence of that Tabur, upon
which Partzuf SAG ends. This Tabur is the entire axis upon which all
the items in Olam ha Nekudim revolve.
Know, that in fact, SAG stretches down to the Sium Raglaim of the
inner AK, called Partzuf Keter. However, after the Tzimtzum of NHY
(to be explained later), it rose and ended at the Tabur.
However, only the Raglaim of Partzuf AB ended there. This is because
from there down is the place of Malchut of the inner AK, namely
Behina Dalet. Since Malchut de Partzuf AB had only Aviut de Behina
Gimel, it could not shine for Behina Dalet of Malchut de inner AK,
whose place is called Tabur. For that reason the Raglaim of Partzuf
AB ended above Tabur.
However, the Koma of Partzuf SAG only reaches Bina. It is known
that the Tzimtzum was only on the Ohr Hochma, not on the Ohr Bina.
For that reason Partzuf SAG could expand and shine below Tabur too,
though it doesn’t have Masach de Behina Dalet.
You already know that Partzuf AB is Hitpashtut Bet of the inner AK,
expanding and filling the Kelim, emptied in Histalkut Aleph. This is

--- PAGE 226 ---
the meaning of Hitpashtut Bet, as has been written, and thus Behinot
ZON of the inner AK below Tabur remained without Ohr.
This is so because Hitpashtut Bet, meaning AB, cannot shine for them,
as it doesn’t have the Masach needed for Kelim de Behina Dalet. For
that reason, the Orot de Partzuf SAG came and filled in for the
absence of AB. They expanded to the same Kelim de ZON below
Tabur, which could not be filled by AB.
It turns out that the Histalkut of the Orot of the Kelim de Partzuf Keter
de AK, called “Inner AK”, could not be fulfilled once more, only
through the two Partzufim AB and SAG. AB filled it to the Tabur, and
SAG filled it from Tabur down to its Sium Raglaim.
SAG itself is divided into Taamim and Nekudot, being Keter de Guf,
and the lower nine Sefirot de Guf from Hochma down (see Part 5, item
24, and Ohr Pnimi there). Only the first Hitpashtut of the Partzuf,
before it begins to diminish, is the Ohr Yashar of that Partzuf, called
Ohr Rachamim.
However, from the moment the Masach begins to purify and diminish
its Koma, they are no longer Behinot Ohr Rachamim. It is so even
though the Ohr Elyon does not stop mating with it on the four Behinot
of its purification as it generates the four levels of Hochma, Bina, ZA
and Malchut on its way. This is the reason they are called Nekudot.
The Orot clothed the Sefirot of the first three Partzufim GAS de AK by
way of Matei ve Lo Matei. Thus, first the Ohr expanded only to Kli de
Keter. Then it is Lo Matei in Keter, meaning its measure of Aviut in
the Masach has been purified. In that state the Ohr is Matei in
Hochma.
This is so because the Ohr expanded in Behinat Rachamim, called
Taamim, only in Kli de Keter. However, the Ohr reached Kli de
Hochma only after the Hizdakchut of the Masach and the diminution
of the Koma, and likewise in the rest of the Sefirot.
For that reason, all the Sefirot below Keter are called Nekudot, as they
are already from Behinot Ohr Hozer and Din. It is written at length in

--- PAGE 227 ---
the words of the Rav above (Part 4, Chap 3).
It’s been explained above (Part 5, item 47, Ohr Pnimi) that the two
Orot that came down and clothed Kli de Keter, are called ZON. The
Zachar has Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut and his Koma reaches
Hochma. The Nekeva has Aviut de Behina Bet and her Koma reaches
Bina.
Hence, Kli de Keter too was forced to end on Tabur, evened with the
Raglaim of AB, for the same reason as AB’s. The Zachar has Komat
(Koma of) Hochma there in Kli de Keter. For that reason the Tzimtzum
is implemented on him as on Partzuf AB, and he must end above
Tabur because he cannot shine to the Kelim de ZON de Behina Dalet.
You find that the Rav’s words that Partzuf SAG expands to the
Raglaim of AK refer only to Behinot Nekudot de SAG, which are the
nine lower Sefirot from Hochma down. However, Taamim de SAG,
being the Keter de Guf de SAG, stop at the Tabur. It is so because it
cannot shine from Tabur down due to the Ohr Hochma in it.
Only after ZON de Keter are purified from Behina Gimel and Behina
Bet in them into Behina Bet and Behina Aleph, which is given to the
Kli de Hochma de SAG, these Orot no longer have any Koma of
Hochma. Then these Orot de SAG expand to the Kelim de ZON in the
inner AK below Tabur, as do the Orot in the other Komot, Bina, ZA
and Malchut.
It has been explained in the Rav’s words above that these four Komot
HB, ZA and Malchut de SAG that expanded below Tabur, rose once
more to the place of the Taamim de SAG above Tabur. They did not
expand from Tabur down any longer.
It is written here, that SAG ends on the Tabur, meaning after the ascent
of these Orot above Tabur. The ascents of these Orot are henceforth
called Tzimtzum NHY.
Understand all the above thoroughly and repeat it until it is seemingly
placed in a box, for you will need all the above in every single word in

--- PAGE 228 ---
the explanation of the Nekudim and the breaking of the vessels, and it
is impossible to always repeat such lengthiness.
And its MA and BON are from its Tabur down, corresponding to
ZON de Atzilut.
It refers to the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim, considered MA and BON of
this SAG. They correspond to the ZON de Atzilut, which also clothe
Partzuf AA from Tabur down, and the reason for these words will be
explained henceforth.
2. As in its Pnimiut, so in the Orot that stem from it, which are its
branches. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB,
and the Se’arot Dikna are from the AHP, corresponding to the
branches of SAG.
AVI are contained in them, and between the two of them, they
took Bina de MA after the correction. It is the name SAG, that
contains the both of them, and they are incorporated in Mazla de
Dikna de AA. Study it thoroughly for so it is here, but then SAG
still expanded to the Raglaim of AK.
Ohr Pnimi
2. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot Dikna are from the AHP, corresponding to the branches of
SAG.
These Se’arot Rosh and Dikna did not come out immediately with the
emanation of the Partzuf, but after the Tzimtzum of NHY and the
ascent of the lower Hey to the Eynaim. It will be explained henceforth
that the lower Hey, which is the joint Masach for Behina Bet and
Behina Dalet together, rose to Hochma de Rosh de SAG, called
Eynaim. There it mated with Ohr Elyon and raised Ohr Hozer from
Hochma to Keter, meaning from Eynaim to Galgalta, extending only
Komat ZA.
In that state the Eser Sefirot de Rosh SAG divided into Galgalta and
Eynaim and to Awzen, Hotem, Peh. Since the place of the Zivug

--- PAGE 229 ---
became the Eynaim, and the Eynaim operated instead of Peh de Rosh,
the three Sefirot AHP became Behinat Guf.
They receive from this Malchut that stands at the Eynaim, pouring to
them from above downward, and only two Sefirot Galgalta and
Eynaim remain there in Behinat Rosh, meaning in Behinat from below
upward. Thus, the Eser Sefirot de Rosh are divided into two Behinot:
Rosh and Guf. It is so because only their Keter and Hochma remain as
Behinat Rosh, but Bina, ZA and Malchut in them departed from
Behinat Rosh and became Sefirot de Guf.
This Zivug, which divides the Eser Sefirot de Rosh into two Behinot,
Rosh and Guf, is made in the Hochma de Rosh SAG itself. However,
for itself, it remains unchanged, as it is known that there is no absence
in spirituality. There is only an addition here, for they are considered
Eser Sefirot of the branches of Rosh de SAG, called Eser Sefirot de
Se’arot.
They are the ones that were divided on the two above Behinot Rosh
and Guf. The Keter and Hochma in them, which remained in Behinat
Rosh, are considered the branches of AB, in the form of Se’arot Rosh.
The three Sefirot AHP in them, which became the Behinat Guf, are
considered Se’arot Dikna, the branches of SAG.
It is written, “The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of
AB, and the Se’arot Dikna are from the AHP, corresponding to the
branches of SAG.” It means that that division of the Eser Sefirot of
the Rosh into two Behinot GE and AHP that occurred in Rosh de SAG,
this renewal is called Se’arot. Also, Behinot Galgalta and Eynaim that
remained in Behinat Rosh is considered the branches of AB, and
Behinot Awzen, Hotem, Peh in them that went outside the Rosh, are
considered the branches of SAG. The reason for it will be explained
henceforth.
AVI are contained in them, and between the two of them, they
took Bina de MA after the correction. It is the name SAG, that
contains the both of them, and they are incorporated in Mazla de
Dikna de AA.

--- PAGE 230 ---
He tells us that as AVI de Atzilut were incorporated and came out of
the Eser Sefirot de Dikna de AA, so the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim
emerged from the Se’arot Dikna de Rosh SAG.
Know, that there are three Behinot AVI: the Inner AVI, Upper AVI, and
YESHSUT. All of these three are contained in Se’arot Dikna, as there
are thirteen Tikkunim of Dikna, which are three HaVaYot, meaning
three Behinot of Eser Sefirot.
The first Eser Sefirot are considered the first four Tikkunim, ending at
Shibolet ha Zakan. The Inner AVI emerged from this Shibolet ha
Zakan, being GAR de Nekudim. The Upper AVI emerged from the
middle four Tikkunim, ending on the Upper Mazal, called Notzer
Hesed. Israel and ST de Atzilut, emerged from the last Eser Sefirot,
being the five lower Tikkunim, ending at the bottom Mazal, called ve
Nakeh.
It is written, “they are incorporated in Mazla de Dikna de AA.” The
above-mentioned AVI are called Abba together, and the above-
mentioned YESHSUT are called Ima together. Abba is incorporated in
the Upper Mazal, and Ima is incorporated in the Lower Mazal, and
both are incorporated in Mazla.
However, the four Upper Tikkunim, that end on Shibolet ha Zakan
belong to the Inner AVI. Only GAR de Nekudim emerged from them,
which are Behinat inner AVI. Remember these things for you will need
them in every single word that follows.
Then SAG still expanded to the Raglaim of AK.
This has already been clarified above (Ohr Pnimi item one, in the
paragraph beginning with “Its SAG”).
3. In the beginning, AK was thus: its first three are AB – Keter, SAG
- Hochma and Bina. This SAG was clothing with its lower half,
which are its Nekudot, over Tabur de AK down, inside MA and
BON de AK, and all this is Pnimiut AK: Atzmut, Orot and Kelim.
Ohr Pnimi
3. In the beginning, AK was thus: its first three are AB – Keter.

--- PAGE 231 ---
The words here are about the same issue presented above, only in
different wording. I copied them only because there are some small
innovations here. Here too it revolves around Partzuf SAG de AK and
connects it with Partzuf AB de AK that’s clothed in it.
You already know that Partzuf SAG clothes from Peh de Rosh de AB
down, meaning the Behinat three Sefirot HGT de Guf de AB. It is
written, “Its first three are AB – Keter.” This is so because HGT de
AB become GAR de Partzuf SAG, where Rosh de SAG clothes them
from without. The Peh, being Malchut de Rosh de AB, is Behinat
Keter de Rosh SAG above it, and HGT de AB are the inner Mochin in
it.
SAG – Hochma and Bina.
It means that there is Hochma and Bina in Partzuf SAG itself. Even
though the entire Koma of SAG is only Komat Bina, it still contains
Zachar and Nekeva. It means that the Masach that rose to Malchut de
Rosh AB for the Zivug for Partzuf SAG consists of two Upper
Reshimot, being Reshimo de Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut (only,
without Hamshacha) and a complete Reshimo de Behina Bet.
For that reason two Zivugim were made on them: the first in Komat
Hochma, and the second in Komat Bina, and they are called ZON. The
Reshimo de Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut that Komat Hochma extended
on is called Zachar, and the Reshimo de Behina Bet, which is
complete with Behinat Hamshacha too, is called Nekeva. The
principal Ohr de Partzuf SAG, which is Komat Bina, came out over
her.
These ZON were clothed only in Kli de Keter of the Guf de SAG and
do not extend from them to the lower nine Sefirot de SAG, though
ZON de Kli de Keter were purified into Behina Bet and Behina Aleph
(see Part 5, Ohr Pnimi, item 47).
It is written, “SAG - Hochma and Bina.” this is so because the
Partzuf is always named after its Upper Sefirot. Since the above
Sefirot of ZON have Komat Hochma and Bina in them, SAG is called
Hochma and Bina.

--- PAGE 232 ---
He tells us that so as to understand the following text, that this SAG
later became Behinat AB, though it is known that AB’s Koma is up to
Hochma. How then could SAG be turned into AB? For that reason he
mentions here that there is Hochma and Bina in this SAG, for the
Zachar is Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut, being Behinat AB, which is
why it later turned into Behinat AB, and remember that.
Its lower half, which are its Nekudot, over Tabur de AK down,
inside MA and BON de AK.
You must remember the meaning of Taamim and Nekudot, presented
above in the Rav’s words (Part 4, Chap 3, item 11). The first
Hitpashtut to the Partzuf, before the Masach begins to purify, is called
Taamim. This is Ohr Yashar and Rachamim.
However, when the Masach begins to purify, Ohr Elyon stretches from
the Maatzil and mates with the Masach during the gradations of its
Hizdakchut. The four Komot emerging at that time, being Hochma,
Bina, ZA and Malchut, are called Nekudot, as they are Behinat Ohr
Hozer and Din.
At the same time you must understand that only the Orot in Kli de
Keter de Guf de SAG are called Taamim, but all nine lower Sefirot
below Keter de Guf de SAG are called Nekudot. You should also know
that Kli de Keter de Guf de SAG expands to the Tabur, meaning to the
Sium Raglaim of the Guf de AB, and that place of Sium is called
Tabur.
It is written, “Its lower half, which are its Nekudot, over Tabur de
AK down, inside MA and BON de AK.” It refers to its lower nine
Sefirot because all lower nine Sefirot are called Nekudot here, for they
all descended below Tabur and clothed the inner MA and BON de AK.
And all this is Pnimiut AK.
It means that all this is Behinat Partzuf SAG in its own structure, and
not at all the braches that stem from it outwardly, which he will
explain later.

--- PAGE 233 ---
4. After that it generated the exterior Behinot to clothe it. First it
generated Orot from the general, interior AB, which is the Se’arot
of the Keter, surrounding its Rosh from without to the Metzach
and to the Awznaim.
Afterwards it generated the Se’arot of the Zakan that extend from
the general SAG called Nekudim, from which the collective three
Mochin in it were made.
Ohr Pnimi
4. The Se’arot of the Keter, surrounding its Rosh from without to the
Metzach and to the Awznaim.
It has already been explained that the Se’arot divide into two Behinot:
Rosh and Guf. Until the Awznaim, which is Bina, it is considered
Rosh, because the place of the Zivug was in Nikvey Eynaim, being
Hochma de Rosh. For that reason the Orot expanded from there down
to the Awzen Hotem Peh, to Behinat Hitlabshut, called Guf.
You already know that there is a great difference between the Rosh
and the Guf. This is the reason it is written that the Se’arot extend
until the Awznaim, because until there it is regarded as Rosh.
However, from the Awznaim down it is already considered Guf.
Se’arot of the Zakan that extend from the general SAG called
Nekudim.
You must know that these AHP that came out from Behinat Rosh to
Behinat Guf are always called “The General SAG”. The reason is, as
the Rav writes in the following, that this entire SAG de AK we deal
with, is considered all AB, except for the Nekudot in it, which are its
bottom half, to be called YESHSUT.
Only that is considered SAG, for only that came out through the
Nikvey Eynaim into Behinat AHP de Guf. This YESHSUT is called the
“General SAG” in every place; it is the Rosh of the Eser Sefirot de
Nekudim.
It’s been explained above that the beginning of the Zivug in Nikvey
Eynaim, which came out of the AHP into Behinat Guf, was made in

--- PAGE 234 ---
Rosh de SAG itself, but as Se’arot. The Se’arot Rosh until the
Awznaim are considered Behinat from below upward, which is Rosh.
Hence, it is still considered AB, as no change is apparent in it yet, due
to the ascent of the lower Hey to Nikvey Eynaim.
However, from Nikvey Eynaim down, which are Se’arot Dikna, they
are already considered AHP that came out of the Rosh and became
Behinat Guf. Hence the AHP de Se’arot alone, called Se’arot Dikna,
are regarded as the General SAG, which is Behinat Nekudim. This will
be explained elaborately in its proper place.
It is written, “Afterwards it generated the Se’arot of the Zakan that
extend from the general SAG called Nekudim.” That means that
from the Behinat Awznaim down the Se’arot of the Zakan extended in
the Behinat general SAG, called Nekudim. However, these Se’arot that
extend from the Nikvey Eynaim, meaning from Malchut in Hochma
from below upward, are still considered AB; they are not branches of
the general SAG.
Thus, the Se’arot Rosh are branches that extend from AB, and Se’arot
Dikna are branches extending from the general SAG, and remember
that.
The collective three Mochin in it.
It means that the first three Sefirot KHB de Nekudim are made of these
Se’arot Zakan, though not from itself, but from them in general,
grouped in the fourth correction of the Se’arot Zakan, called Shibolet
ha Zakan. As it is written elaborately afterwards. It is written, “from
which the collective three Mochin in it were made.”
5. First the Taamim de SAG extended, which is AHP through its
Tabur. It did not bring the other Behinot out afterwards, for they
are clothed inside MA and BON as the Orot of the collective AB, of
which only the Se’arot that extend from the AB of the general AB
appeared. The rest of them are concealed inside the general SAG.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 235 ---
5. First the Taamim de SAG extended, which is AHP through its
Tabur.
It means that in the beginning, Taamim de SAG came out before the
branches of the general SAG came out, meaning the Se’arot Rosh and
Dikna, occupying Komat AHP through its Tabur, which are Behinat
Ohr Yashar and Rachamim (see Ohr Pnimi, item 1). He says there,
that there is also Behinat Zachar there, whose Koma is up to Hochma,
but he still calls the Partzuf AHP.
This is so because the primary Ohr and the Koma is considered
Behinat Nekeva, which has Behinot Aviut de Hamshacha. The Nekeva
has only Komat AHP, namely Komat Bina, and the reason it ends on
the Tabur has already been explained there elaborately.
For they are clothed inside MA and BON.
The matter of this Hitlabshut has already been explained (Ohr Pnimi,
item 1). The AB did not return to fill the Kelim that were emptied from
Tabur down in the inner AK. It is so because the AB doesn’t have a
Masach of Behina Dalet, and therefore cannot shine from Tabur
down, which is the place of Behina Dalet.
Thus, the Kelim de ZON in the inner AK from Tabur down remained
without Ohr. Afterwards, when Partzuf SAG expanded, its nine lower
Sefirot, having only Komat Ohr Bina, which is an Ohr that was not
restricted, descended below Tabur de AK and there filled the ZON
with Ohr.
It is written, “It did not bring the other Behinot out” below Taamim
de SAG, being the lower nine Sefirot de SAG, because they are clothed
in MA and BON. It means that the lower nine Sefirot de SAG that
clothe in ZON below Tabur of the inner AK, are called MA and BON.
Remember these words for this matter of Hitlabshut of the lower nine
Sefirot de SAG in the inner MA and BON is fundamental for every
incident in Olam ha Nekudim.
6. Then it wanted to bring the Hitzoniut of the inner MA and BON in
it outwardly. In that state all the inner Behinot SAG, concealed in

--- PAGE 236 ---
the inner MA and BON rose, and the inner MA and BON rose
along with them. Thus these MA and BON are their MAN, to the
Taamim de SAG themselves, which are not clothed inside MA and
BON.
They are in the role of AVI to YESHSUT, because as Upper AVI
mate for ZON, and YESHSUT are contained in them, so here the
Taamim de SAG mate with the entire AB.
Moreover, the Nekudot, Tagin and Otiot de SAG join them and
annul before them. Consequently, they do not bear a name, as the
above-mentioned YESHSUT. Then they procreate Behinat BON de
Hitzoniut and their Levush outwardly. Thus, the Nekeva was now
born first.
Ohr Pnimi
6. All the inner Behinot SAG, concealed in the inner MA and BON
rose.
This issue of ascent is as the ascent of the Orot in Histalkut Aleph in
the inner AK, and as the ascent of the Orot de Histalkut Bet in Partzuf
AB. It implies a complete Hizdakchut of the Masach from its entire
Aviut until it equalized with Behinat Masach de Rosh. This Hishtavut
means that the Masach and all the Reshimot contained in it rose to
Malchut de Rosh and incorporated in her in the Zivug of the Rosh.
The same occurred in this Partzuf SAG, for after it is Matei in Malchut
de SAG, meaning when the Masach had been purified into Komat
Malchut, it too came from there and was completely purified from its
Aviut. It equalized entirely with Malchut de Rosh, the Zivug stopped
from the Partzuf, and all the Orot left to the Maatzil, as has been
explained above (Part 4, Chap 4, Ohr Pnimi, item 50).
It’s been explained there that the Orot leave Reshimot after their
departure. It has also been explained that the as the Masach passes
from Sefira to Sefira during the Hizdakchut, until it is completely
purified and comes to the Rosh, becomes contained in those Reshimot.

--- PAGE 237 ---
It follows, that the Orot de SAG that clothed in the inner ZON, these
Orot that have already mixed with the Aviut de Behina Dalet in the
Kelim below Tabur, left Reshimot behind them although they have
departed. These Reshimot de Behina Dalet mingled in the Masach that
rose to Malchut de Rosh, so that when the Masach rose to Malchut de
Rosh, it brought those Reshimot of the inner ZON along with it, called
the inner MA and BON.
It is written, “In that state all the inner Behinot SAG, concealed in
the inner MA and BON rose.” This applies to the Reshimot of the
lower nine Sefirot de SAG itself, clothed and concealed inside the
Reshimot of the inner MA and BON from Aviut de Behina Dalet.
The Reshimot de Orot de SAG are contained and mixed in Reshimot
de MA and BON. Because of that they rose and mingled together with
the Masach de SAG to the Malchut de Rosh, and there incorporated in
the Upper Zivug, as he will explain henceforth.
We might ask: but it has been explained that Partzuf SAG remained in
Behinat permanent Matei ve Lo Matei. How then, does he say here
that in SAG there is also the Histalkut of all the Orot to the Rosh.
Indeed, you already know that there is no absence in the spiritual, and
all the changes we discern in the spirituals are but additional forms,
without the former Tzura ever being canceled. It is the same here, for
though there is a matter of Histalkut Orot here too, after the Orot de
SAG mixed with the inner MA and BON, the perpetual Tzura of Matei
ve Lo Matei still remains in tact.
And the inner MA and BON rose along with them.
It has already been explained above that the Reshimot de SAG mingled
with the Reshimot of MA and BON, and all were incorporated in the
Masach and rose along with it to the Rosh.
MA and BON are their MAN.
The Masach ascends to Malchut de Rosh to mingle there in the Zivug
of the Rosh, to be renewed and expand from there to a new Partzuf as
in the previous two Partzufim, AB and SAG. This Masach has now

--- PAGE 238 ---
acquired a new name, which is MAN, the initials for Mayin Nukvin
(Aramaic – Female Waters).
It is so for the reason explained above that two kinds of Reshimot
mingled here in one another: the Reshimot de Orot de SAG, being
Behinat Aviut de Behina Bet, with the Reshimot of the Orot that
clothed the inner MA and BON. Those are, in turn, Behinat Aviut de
Behina Dalet.
It is known that Behina Bet is the first Hey of HaVaYaH, and the Aviut
de Behina Dalet is the last Hey of the name HaVaYaH, which are two
females. When the Masach rises to mingle in the Zivug of the Rosh, it
mingles with these two females together. For that reason it is now
called Mayin Nukvin, in plural tense, since it is incorporated of both
females.
Know, that this connection caused the making of ten Kelim in the ten
Sefirot, and the Tikun of two Kavim. This is the meaning of the
association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din: the first Hey is Midat ha
Rachamim, and the last Hey is Midat ha Din. Now they came together
in the Masach, in a single Zivug.
It is written, “these MA and BON are their MAN.” it means that they
induced the matter of the MAN that was renewed from here on in the
Olamot, because they are the ZON of the inner AK, reaching up to
Keter due to the Behina Dalet in it.
They were incorporated and came in the Reshimo de Behina Bet
which come from the Orot de SAG, and were brought together in the
Aviut in the Masach. At that time they were called MAN.
Know, that from the moment they were joined, they never again
parted. The only differentiation in them is in the Pnimiut and
Hitzoniut. Sometimes Behina Dalet is inside and Behina Bet or Behina
Aleph is on the outside, and sometimes Behina Bet is in the inside and
Behina Dalet is exposed without, as was here the first time they
joined.

--- PAGE 239 ---
The Rav writes here, “the inner Behinot SAG, concealed in the
inner MA and BON.” Thus, Behina Bet is concealed inside, while
Behina Dalet is uncovered outwardly. This will be explained further in
its place.
Their MAN, to the Taamim de SAG themselves, which are not
clothed inside MA and BON.
It has been explained above that the Taamim de SAG, being the Orot
in Kli de Keter de Guf de Partzuf SAG, must end evenly with the Sium
Raglaim of AB, meaning above Tabur. This is because the Zachar
clothed in Kli de Keter has Komat Hochma, as does AB.
It follows, that the Orot of Taamim de SAG are not clothed in MA and
BON below Tabur. This is why it says that they became MAN to the
Taamim de SAG themselves, which are not clothed in MA and BON,
namely the ZON in Kli Keter de Guf de SAG, ending above Tabur. The
matter of it being made here and the Ohr that was drawn because of it
will be explained later in its proper place.
AVI to YESHSUT.
This syllogism must be thoroughly understood, as there are two very
different halves of SAG here. Those are the Upper half of SAG, which
is Kli de Keter de Guf de SAG, called Taamim, ending above Tabur
and not descending and mixing with the inner MA and BON. It
remains in its Aviut of Behina Bet, and Behina Gimel of Hitlabshut.
The lower half of SAG, meaning the lower nine Sefirot from Hochma
down is called Nekudot de SAG. It descended and mingled with the
inner MA and BON and two kinds of Aviut were mingled in it: that of
Behina Bet and that of Behina Dalet together.
He says that its Upper half, which did not mix with Behina Dalet, is
called Upper AVI, and its lower half, which was mixed with Behina
Dalet as MAN, is called Israel Saba ve Tvuna. Remember these names
well for the Rav uses them all throughout the rest.
Know, that this is the root of the division of AVI to two Partzufim,
called AVI and YESHSUT. Both emerge as AHP that came out,

--- PAGE 240 ---
meaning Se’arot Dikna, and these AHP already receive from the lower
half of SAG, corrected with MAN. However, because they are ten
complete Sefirot of Rosh, where AVI are from Behinat Nikvey Eynaim
and up, they are still not considered incorporated in the MAN.
This is so because the Masach de MAN is erected below them,
meaning in Nikvey Eynaim, and the Aviut does not operate at all from
below upward. However, since YESHSUT is considered the AHP of
the Partzuf, extending from Nikvey Eynaim down, where Masach de
MAN already operates on them, YESHSUT are ascribed to the lower
Partzuf de SAG, that’s already mixed with Behina Dalet.
Upper AVI mate for ZON and YESHSUT are contained in them.
The matter of AVI and YESHSUT de Atzilut has already been
explained. They are considered a single Rosh of Eser Sefirot GE and
AHP. They were divided into two halves of the Rosh through the
ascent of the lower Hey to Nikvey Eynaim. The Upper part, Galgalta
ve Eynaim, is not considered connected with Behina Dalet in the
Lower Hey yet, since she is below the Eynaim. It is called AVI.
The other half of the Eser Sefirot de Rosh, which are the AHP below
the lower Hey in the Nikvey Eynaim, is considered connected with the
Behina Dalet in the lower Hey. Hence, they are regarded as Guf,
which receives from the Nikvey Eynaim of the Rosh from above
downward.
These two halves of the Rosh join together into a single Partzuf for the
procreation of ZON. It is so because that lower Hey in Nikvey Eynaim
returns and descends to the place of the Peh, to Malchut of the Rosh.
Then the AHP return to the Rosh as well and unite with AVI into a
single Behina of Eser Sefirot de Rosh. Then they beget Mochin for
ZON de Atzilut.
It is written, “As Upper AVI mate for ZON and YESHSUT are
contained in them, so here the Taamim de SAG mate with the
entire AB. Moreover, the Nekudot, Tagin and Otiot de SAG join
them and annul before them.”

--- PAGE 241 ---
Explanation: the issue of the birth of Mochin de ZA has been
explained above. AVI join with YESHSUT into a single Rosh, and the
Zivug is done on Masach de Behina Bet in the general Peh of this
Rosh. The Eser Sefirot that come out on this Masach have Komat GAR
de Bina, which become Mochin and GAR for ZA.
However, it is not so for the purpose of Ibur ZA, meaning the Katnut
of ZA. Although this Zivug should be made in AVI too, which are
always Behinat Rosh, here YESHSUT are mixed with AVI because the
drop of ZA contained in NHY de AA ascends and mingles in Masach
de YESHSUT.
YESHSUT, in turn, are incorporated in AVI, and the Zivug takes place
in the Masach de YESHSUT, incorporated as MAN in Masach de AVI.
The Koma emerging on this Zivug is close to Behina Aleph, lacking
GAR, and then ZA comes out without Mochin, but only as Behinat Guf
without a Rosh.
In the beginning, only Behinat Katnut de Nekudim emerged, like the
above ZA de Atzilut. Hence, Nekudot de SAG, mixed with Behina
Dalet, rose and mingled within the Taamim de SAG. Those, in turn,
did not mix with Behina Dalet and are regarded as Upper AVI.
The Taamim de SAG rose to Rosh de SAG with the MAN of the
Nekudot and the Zivug was made on the MAN de Nekudot,
incorporated in the Taamim, not on the Behinat Masach of the
Taamim. Then MAN rose to the Eynaim, which are Behina Aleph,
because the Ohr Hozer ascending from Hochma to Keter extends only
Komat ZA, and it is this Koma which descended from Tabur down
once more to the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim.
It is written, “Moreover, the Nekudot, Tagin and Otiot de SAG join
them and annul before them.” This is so because the lower nine of
SAG, which are Hochma, Bina, ZA and Malchut, are called Nekudot,
Tagin, Otiot. Nekudot are HB, Tagin are MA, meaning ZA, and Otiot
are BON, which is Malchut. They became MAN and rose to the
Taamim de SAG, where they joined with them and incorporated in

--- PAGE 242 ---
those Taamim. Hence the Zivug took place there in the Eynaim de
Rosh of the Taamim.
BON de Hitzoniut and their Levush outwardly.
Do not err in interpreting that Komat Malchut (always referred to as
BON) was born here, because the Zivug performed in Nikvey Eynaim
is from Behinat Aviut de Behina Aleph, which is Komat ZA. Moreover,
there is Behina Bet from Behinat Hitlabshut here, which is close to
Komat SAG.
Indeed, you shall see that the Rav calls it by the name BON de
Hitzoniut, and not merely BON, as it is actually Behinat SAG. This
Koma is actually called YESHSUT, which is SAG. However, Behinat
exterior AHP of this YESHSUT descended to Behinat Nekudim below
Tabur, where the root Nekeva of all the Olamot is built, whose value is
actually SAG, not BON.
This is so because the inner BON, Behina Dalet, remained entirely in
the inner AK, and not a single Behina of it appeared in all the Olamot.
Thus, Malchut of YESHSUT that emerged through Nikvey Eynaim is
called BON, as she inherited the place of the inner BON, as he says,
“Then they procreate Behinat BON de Hitzoniut.”
Thus, the Nekeva was now born first.
As it says above, Malchut de YESHSUT that emerged through the
Eynaim, from which the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim were emanated, is
the root Nekeva in all the Olamot.
7. *When the Maatzil wanted to emanate Olam ha Nekudim, His
intention was to make them Kelim so as to have strength in the
lower Olamot to receive the Ohr Elyon. The MaatzilI, Ein Sof, saw
that there is still no strength and ability in the Tachtonim to
receive these Orot that exit through the Nikvey Eynaim and
expand from the place of Tabur de AK to its Raglaim.
Consequently, before He emanated these Orot, there was another,
second Tzimtzum in AK, as the above-mentioned Tzimtzum in Ein
Sof: He brought all the Ohr that expanded in the Pnimiut of this

--- PAGE 243 ---
AK from the place of its Tabur down, above the place of the Tabur
into its Upper half of the Guf. As a result, the aforementioned
place from Tabur down remained without Orot.
Ohr Pnimi
7. There is no strength and ability in the Tachtonim to receive these
Orot that exit through the Nikvey Eynaim.
It is so because the Ohr Hozer that comes out on Behinat Aviut de
Behina Aleph, is only a fine Ohr; it does not reach Behinat Guf,
meaning Hitlabshut, as has been explained in previous parts. You also
know, that the Eynaim are a name for Sefirat Hochma of the Rosh,
which is Behina Aleph, being the reason that he writes that there was
still no strength and ability to receive the Orot de Nikvey Eynaim.
There was another, second Tzimtzum in AK, as the above-
mentioned Tzimtzum in Ein Sof.
This is seemingly perplexing, for in the two previous Partzufim there
was the same Histalkut Orot from the Guf de Elyon to emanate to the
Tachton, which the Rav calls Histalkut Aleph and Histalkut Bet (see
Part 5, item 60). But how is this Histalkut of NHY de AK different that
gives it the name Tzimtzum Bet, and even resembles it to the first
Tzimtzum in the Olamot?
The thing is that there is indeed something completely new here,
unlike the Histalkut Ohr that was in AB and Galgalta de AK. Here
there is a new point of Tzimtzum, added to the first point of Tzimtzum
that was in the Tzimtzum of Ein Sof.
This is so because of the mixture of the Reshimot de SAG and the
Reshimot de Behina Dalet in one another. Because of that the place of
the Tzimtzum on Sium de Behina Dalet rose to the place of Sium de
Behina Bet, which is Behinat Tabur de Olam ha Nekudim.
In this manner, the matter of the ascent of the Orot de NHY to HGT de
AK, generated the new point of Tzimtzum and Sium to the Olamot,
exactly like the first Tzimtzum in Ein Sof, as the Rav says. You should
also know, that from the place of the new Tzimtzum, being the Tabur

--- PAGE 244 ---
of the Nekudim, to the place of the first Tzimtzum, being ha Olam ha
Zeh, is where the three Olamot below Atzilut stand, called BYA.
The Ohr that expanded in the Pnimiut of this AK from the place of
its Tabur down, above the place of the Tabur into its Upper half of
the Guf. Consequently, the aforementioned place from Tabur.
It has already been explained that the Rav speaks of two Partzufim
here: the first Partzuf of AK, called in Inner AK, where Aviut de
Behina Dalet operates, and the third Partzuf of AK, called SAG, where
Aviut de Behina Bet operates. It is written about it in item 1 Ohr
Pnimi; study it well there for it is impossible to go to that length again.
Tabur means the place of the Sium Raglin de Hitpashtut Bet de AK,
called AB. This is because it’s been explained there that this AB has
only Masach de Behina Gimel. For that reason it cannot shine below
Tabur of the inner AK, being the place of Kelim de Behina Dalet.
AB doesn’t have Masach de Behina Dalet, and it is therefore
considered to end on the Tabur, and the Kelim of the inner AK remain
empty, without Ohr, from Tabur down, as they were during the first
Histalkut before AB expanded.
However, after the third Partzuf expanded, called SAG, its Behinot
Nekudot expanded, which are its lower nine Sefirot, having only Ohr
Bina. They clothed and filled the empty Kelim from Tabur de Inner
AK down.
Thus, these Orot from Tabur de AK down are two Partzufim: the Inner
AK, and SAG de AK. It is so because the nine lower Sefirot de SAG
clothe half Tifferet and NHY of the Inner AK, meaning the place from
its Tabur down.
It is written, “all the Ohr that expanded in the Pnimiut of this AK
from the place of its Tabur down,” meaning the two kinds of Ohr,
being the lower nine of SAG and ZON de Behina Dalet de Inner AK
Himself.
“He brought all the Ohr that expanded in the Pnimiut of this AK
from the place of its Tabur down, above the place of the Tabur into

--- PAGE 245 ---
its Upper half of the Guf.” This means that these two kinds of Orot
departed from that place below Tabur, called TNHY, and rose to the
place above the point of Tabur, which is Taamim de SAG.
He brought all the Ohr… …above the place of the Tabur.
This raising of the Orot from below, from Tabur de AK, to the place
above Tabur, is the most fundamental issue in this wisdom; hence, we
must thoroughly understand it. This is actually a very long issue,
clarified only through the understanding of all the Rav’s teachings
regarding the emanation of Nekudim.
However, its axis revolves primarily around the association of Midat
ha Rachamim with Din, namely the joining of Behina Bet, which is
Bina, with Behina Dalet, which is Malchut. This is brought in the
Zohar (Ruth), regarding the verse, “And they both went,” explaining
that the two Heys in the Name HaVaYaH, meaning the first Hey, Bina,
and the second Hey, Malchut, fused and became as one.
This thing is rooted here in the ascent of the Orot of NHY de AK
below Tabur to HGT above Tabur. It is so because in the beginning,
the Ohr of the lower nine of SAG, which are Behina Bet below Tabur
de AK, expanded, clothed and connected with ZON de Behina Dalet
there.
In that, Behina Dalet received strength so that afterwards she would
be able to ascend along with the lower nine of SAG, meaning Ohr
Yashar Rachamim of Hitpashtut SAG, called Nikvey Eynaim. Thus,
Behina Dalet, the lower Hey, came and clothed in the Masach in
Nikvey Eynaim. She was incorporated there in the Upper Zivug on this
Masach that raises Ohr Hozer from Hochma to Keter, extending
Koma of Behina Aleph, being Komat ZA.
However, since there is also Behinat Hitlabshut of Behina Bet there, it
is considered Komat Israel Saba ve Tvuna. It turns out that there is
Behina Dalet incorporated in this YESHSUT that emerges from the
Zivug de Eynaim, which is the lower Hey of HaVaYaH. Thus, the two
Behinot: Midat ha Rachamim, which is Behinat YESHSUT, and Midat
ha Din, namely Behinat Lower Hey, joined here in a single Partzuf.

--- PAGE 246 ---
Thus you find that this connection and association of Behina Bet with
Behina Dalet was made by the ascent of the Orot NHY de AK to its
HGT above Tabur. This is because Behina Bet and Behina Dalet rose
from there, mingled in one another, until they came to the place of the
Zivug together with the Ohr Elyon, called Nikvey Eynaim, where they
were actually made into one Partzuf.
This Partzuf is called Olam ha Nekudim. Remember that concept, as it
is the basis of all the following teachings. The details of this issue and
the reason for the Histalkut of the Orot de NHY has already been
explained (Ohr Pnimi, item 6).
8. The learned one shall understand and will conclude one thing
from another, how in all the Olamot, the Ne’etzalim that shine in
the Olam below them are always Behinat lower half de Tifferet and
NHY. It is so because we’ve found how half Tifferet and NHY de
ZA shine in its Nukva, NHY de AA and AVI shine for ZA, and NHY
de Atik Yomin to AA.
Also, this Tifferet and that NHY de AK shine to Atik Yomin and to
the entire Olam Atzilut, as will be explained. Furthermore, you
shall see that the Tzimtzum is necessary for every elicitation of
Orot to emanate them. It shall be clarified how AA too restricted
its Orot NHY to emanate ZA and its Nukva later in its place.
9. *Thus, after He restricted Himself, He placed one Parsa in the
middle of its Guf, inside its place of Tabur, to separate between the
two. This is the meaning of the verse, “Let there be a firmament in
the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the
waters.”
It is also mentioned in the Zohar (Bereshit): “There is one
membrane in the middle of one’s intestines; it stops from above
downward, draws from above, and gives below.” Then the entire
Ohr remains above this Parsa and it is there squeezed tightly.
Then it breaches this Parsa and comes down to shine in the rest of
the Guf from Tabur down.

--- PAGE 247 ---
Ohr Pnimi
9. He placed one Parsa in the middle of its Guf… …draws from
above, and gives below.
Parsa means the ending of the Masach of the Partzuf, like the toes of
the Raglaim. The difference is in the values of the Pnimiut and the
Hitzoniut. The Parsa is the Behinat Sium for the Hitzoniut of the
Partzuf as well.
This Parsa was made after the Zivug Elyon performed in Nikvey
Eynaim. It means that the place of the Zivug ascended from the place
of the Peh, being Malchut of the Rosh, to the place of Nikvey Eynaim,
which is the Hochma de Rosh.
In that state the Eser Sefirot of the Rosh were divided into two degrees
Rosh and Guf, with a great distance between them, as in the Rosh
there are as yet no Kelim and actual Hitlabshut. This is so because the
Ohr Hozer operates there from below upward, not from above
downward, which means Hitlabshut.
Malchut of the Rosh expanded into Eser Sefirot from her and within
her by the force of the Zivug performed in the Masach in her, and then
the Ohr clothed in her from above downward, meaning in complete
Hitlabshut. Now the place of the Masach and the Zivug rose to Nikvey
Eynaim, which is Hochma de Rosh.
Consequently, the Ohr Hozer ascends, clothes the Ohr Yashar from
Hochma up to Keter, and Malchut in that Hochma is then found to
expand with the Ohr Yashar in her from above downward to the three
Sefirot Bina and ZON de Rosh.
These Bina, ZA and Malchut, called AHP, then become Behinot
Sefirot de Guf, meaning vessels of reception for that Ohr that stems
from the Zivug in Nikvey Eynaim. Thus, a whole Partzuf, Rosh and
Guf, was made here of Eser Sefirot of a single Rosh, where only the
Galgalta ve Eynaim remained in it as Rosh, and the Awzen, Hotem,
Peh that were in it, became Behinat Guf to that Rosh.

--- PAGE 248 ---
To the same extent that the root Malchut of the Rosh ascended from
the Peh to Nikvey Eynaim, so were the Eser Sefirot de Sium of that
Partzuf SAG divided. It is so because the ending Eser Sefirot of the
Partzuf begin in the SAG, from the place of the Chazeh to Sium
Raglin. Behinot Keter and Hochma in it expand from the Chazeh to
Tabur, and the three Sefirot: Bina, ZA and Malchut in it expand from
Tabur to Sium Raglin.
It turns out that now, as Bina, ZA and Malchut de Rosh departed from
Behinat Rosh and became Behinat Guf, so Bina, ZA and Malchut de
Sefirot of the Sium completely departed from the Atzilut of the
Partzuf.
Thus, that ending Masach of the Partzuf, which stood at the Malchut
of the ending Eser Sefirot, which is the place of the toes of the
Raglaim, now rose to Hochma of these Eser Sefirot, being the place of
the Tabur. The three Sefirot: Bina, ZA, and Malchut below Tabur went
completely outside the Partzuf and Behinat Atzilut of the Partzuf was
completely canceled in them.
Now you can thoroughly understand that those nine lower Sefirot de
SAG that previously expanded from Tabur to Sium Raglin of the Inner
AK, rose to Behinat MAN to the Taamim de SAG and to Behinat
Nikvey Eynaim. They did not come back down afterwards, to their first
place, meaning to Sium Raglin de AK, as the place of the point of Sium
of Partzuf SAG had already changed to the place of the Tabur. A
Masach that ends SAG was spread there, and they remained above
Tabur and the Parsa. Only ZON of AK ha Pnimi that was incorporated
in them came down below Tabur.
The matter of “draws from above, and gives below” and the
breaching of the Parsa by the Ohr will be explained later.
10. Certainly, through the Histalkut Ohr above Tabur, it was sufficient
for Olam Atzilut to be able to receive their Ohr. However it was
insufficient to give strength to Olam Beria, so that it too would be
able to receive its Ohr. For that purpose He added another
Behina, to place that Masach and Parsa there.

--- PAGE 249 ---
It turns out that they are two things, the Tzimtzum of the Ohr
above, so that Atzilut might receive its Ohr. The reason that new
Ohr emerged through its ascent is certainly that this Ohr came
diminished. Thus, although it comes from SAG Himself, they
could receive it. The matter of the Parsa occurred so that Beria too
would be able to receive His Ohr.
Ohr Pnimi
10. The Tzimtzum of the Ohr above, so that Atzilut might receive… …
a new Ohr elicited.
This refers to the Ohr that emerged by the Zivug in Nikvey Eynaim,
whose point has been explained above. Only Behinat Atzilut was
corrected through this Ohr, meaning Behinat Nekudim through the
Tabur de Nekudim, and until there is the place of the Atzilut, to be
after this Olam. However, nothing of that Ohr came to the place below
Tabur de Nekudim.
New Ohr emerged through its ascent is certainly that this Ohr
came diminished. Thus, although it comes from SAG.
SAG diminished from Komat Bina to Komat ZA by the ascent up to
the place of the Nikvey Eynaim, which is Hochma and Behina Aleph.
Hence, the Kelim can receive it as Behinat Atzilut.
Know, that this new Ohr is the Ohr de Kelim de Panim de GAR; it is
the Atzmut of the Ohr de GAR and Nekudim. However, that new Ohr
that was later emanated by Zivug AB SAG, which descended, breached
the Parsa and illuminated for Nekudim, is not Behinat Atzmut Ohr of
Nekudim. Rather, it is considered an addition of Ohr and Behinat
Gadlut.
It is written, “new Ohr emerged through its ascent is certainly that
this Ohr came diminished. Thus, although it comes from SAG
Himself, they could receive it.” This refers to the Kelim de GAR de
Nekudim, and he calls them Olam ha Atzilut, because they are the
Shorashim to Olam ha Atzilut.

--- PAGE 250 ---
11. *We should provide the reason why these two things were needed:
first, the Tzimtzum; second, the laying down of the Parsa. The
thing is that for the Tachtonim to be able to receive the Ohr, it
must be diminished and come through Masachim.
In Olam ha Nekudim there was the main outset of the uncovering
of the Kelim. For that purpose, the aforementioned Tzimtzum had
to diminish the Ohr so that the Kelim of Nekudim could tolerate it.
Also, since they are restricted there, they are squeezed tightly, and
thus come out intensely through the Eynaim and expand below.
12. It was also necessary to place the Parsa and diminish the Orot that
come out through the Parsa. The reason for the additional
diminution through the Parsa is not for Olam ha Nekudim itself,
which is Olam Atzilut, but for Olam Beria below it, so it would be
able to receive the Ohr elicited for it. Now you can understand
how there is Masach and Parsa between Beria and Atzilut.
However, from Atzilut to what is above it there is no need for an
actual Masach, only remoteness of location, which is the above
Tzimtzum. This is because the Ohr rose above Tabur and drew far
from the point opposite the Tabur and down from without.
Ohr Pnimi
12. Parsa is not for Olam ha Nekudim itself, which is Olam Atzilut, but
for Olam Beria below it.
It has already been explained above that the matter of the Parsa is the
Masach that ends Partzuf SAG, like the toes of the Raglaim before.
However, there is a big correction in it, which the Zohar calls “draws
from above and gives below.”
This is because it is considered a double Masach, made of two
Behinot: Behina Bet and Behina Dalet together. Hence, when Beria
should receive the Ohr from Atzilut there is the matter of the fissuring
of the Parsa in it. This fissuring means annulment of the Gevul of the
Sium in it and the Hitpashtut Orot de SAG below Parsa, though it is
only a temporary annulment, which is afterwards blocked once more.

--- PAGE 251 ---
Thus, it is like an opening that closes and opens. It depends on the
descent of Behina Dalet de Parsa from within Behina Bet de Parsa.
When the two Behinot are tightly connected to each other, the Parsa is
closed like the Masach that stands at the Etzbaot (toes) Raglaim,
where there is no Hitpashtut of the Partzuf past its Etzbaot Raglaim.
When Behina Dalet leaves the Parsa and comes down to the place of
the Etzbaot Raglaim of the Partzuf, as was before, the force of the
Sium of the Parsa is then revoked. This is called the “Fissuring of the
Parsa”. Then the Orot pass from there down to Olam Beria, and this
is what the Zohar means by the words, “draws from above and gives
below.”
Masach and Parsa between Beria and Atzilut.
By the force of the Parsa that’s been corrected here under Partzuf
SAG de AK, the Gevul of Olam ha Nekudim was set on its Behinat
Tabur. It is on this Tabur de Nekudim that that Parsa was made
between Atzilut and Beria, and this inference helps understand the
Parsa between Atzilut and Beria, for they are one issue.
Atzilut
What is above it does not need an actual Masach, only remoteness of
location. It means that the Sium Raglaim of SAG on the Parsa is
because of ascent of the Orot below Tabur to MAN to Nikvey Eynaim.
Hence, the AHP of the Rosh came out of the Rosh, and Bina, ZA and
Malchut de Eser Sefirot of the Sium, went outside the Guf of Atzilut.
Therefore, it seems that Parsa comes to correct the emanation of the
Orot of Nekudim because they emanate from the Orot of the Eynaim.
That is the reason he says that it is true that the matter of the Sium
itself de Partzuf SAG on the Parsa, came along with attribute of
Atzilut in Nikvey Eynaim.
However, this is still not considered Masach and Parsa, but only
remoteness of location. It is so because before that, the Sium of
Partzuf SAG was even with the Raglaim of AK ha Pnimi. Now,
however, owing to the Zivug that rose in the Ohr Eynaim, the Sium of

--- PAGE 252 ---
the Partzuf ascended to the place of Tabur, and this new Gevul is
referred to as merely remoteness of location.
The Parsa, however, is a different matter, which is added to the
remoteness from Tabur up, for the purpose of Beria, because there is a
special Tikun in the Parsa, because of which Orot Atzilut pass into
Beria.
13. The learned one shall thus understand what is written, that any
emergence of renewed Orot and additional Olamot is only by
Tzimtzum Ohr. This is because so was Tzimtzum Ein Sof to elicit
AK, and AK to elicit Nekudim, which is Atzilut. All this is very close
to the abolition of the Melachim (kings), and prohibited to elicit in
the Peh, as it is a high place.
Ohr Pnimi
13. Renewed Orot and additional Olamot is only by Tzimtzum Ohr.
No Hidush occurs in the Olamot but only because of Hidush Kelim.
However, in the Ohr, there is never any change. As it shines in the
Rosh of the Kav, so the Ohr shines at the end of Assiya.
The matter of the formation of the Kelim is as the Rav says above
(Part 4, Chap 1, item 9): “because the reason for the Hitpashtut of
the Ohr and its Histalkut later caused the Kli to be.” Thus, the
Tzimtzum and the Histalkut of the Ohr is the essence of the existence
of the Kli. The reason for this is explained in detail in Part 4 and
Histaklut Pnimit item 58.
Tzimtzum Ein Sof to elicit AK.
This is explained in Histaklut Pnimit Part 4 item 63.
close to the abolition of the Melachim.
This has been explained above (Part 4, Chap 4, item 7, and Ohr Pnimi
there, item 400). The comparison between the Tzimtzum of Ein Sof to
produce the AK, which is the first Kav that Ein Sof illuminated into the
place of the Tzimtzum and the second Tzimtzum, which is Tzimtzum

--- PAGE 253 ---
NHY de AK, has already been explained. They are both Behinat Sium
and cessation to Orot Atzilut.
The difference is that the point of cessation made by Tzimtzum Aleph
and the point of Sium Raglin de Partzuf AK was in Olam ha Zeh. This
is because the Raglaim of AK end in Olam ha Zeh, as it says, “And
His feet shall stand upon the Mount of Olives.”
Tzimtzum Bet made the place of the Sium and cessation of Atzilut de
SAG. This point of new cessation is called Parsa. It is also the Sium
Raglin of all the Partzufim of Atzilut that come after Partzuf SAG.
This is because any innovated force in the Elyon necessarily controls
its Tachtonim as well. This is the place of the severance and the
cessation between Olam Atzilut and the three Olamot BYA.
14. After the above-mentioned Tzimtzum and Parsa, it is found that
there are many Orot there in the place of the Chazeh, and their
ascent for Mayin Nukvin was beneficial there. You will understand
that from what’s been written regarding AVI: each were divided
into two - Abba and Israel Saba; Bina and Tvuna. The learned one
shall understand that so was here.
This is so because the name AB of AK are the Mochin inside
Galgalta, and the name SAG is from Awzen down to the Tabur in
its Pnimiut, not in the Behinat exiting Orot, but the inner Orot of
AK themselves. Thus, AB, which is Dechura, which are its Mochin,
mated with the Taamim of SAG from the inner AHP. Those, in
turn, are the Shorashim for the exiting Orot and branches, and
these inner Taamim of SAG, Nukva, mated together.
Ohr Pnimi
14. And their ascent for Mayin Nukvin was beneficial there. You will
understand… …AVI: each were divided into two.
The issue of the MAN has already been explained above (Ohr Pnimi
item 6), and there is no need to repeat the words. The matter of AVI
that were divided into two has already been explained (Ohr Pnimi
item 6), and study it there for it is impossible to repeat all that.

--- PAGE 254 ---
You will find that two Zivugim were made there for the Eser Sefirot de
Nekudim: first by the ascent of NHY de AK, incorporating both Behina
Dalet and Behina Bet together to MAN de Taamim de SAG, and from
there to Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh SAG. This generated a division of the
Eser Sefirot de Rosh SAG there into two Behinot Rosh and Guf: GE
became the Rosh, and AHP departed as Behinat Guf. This is so
because the same division of Galgalta and Eynaim and AHP was not
done in the Etzem of Rosh de SAG, but in the Behinat Eser Sefirot de
Se’arot.
However, the Rosh de SAG cannot bestow upon its Tachton except
through this Partzuf of the Se’arot, because any force renewed in the
Elyon necessarily controls its Tachton. Thus, all the Orot bestowed
upon the Tachtonim come out by the Zivug in Nikvey Eynaim and
receive from the Behinat AHP de Se’arot. Also, they must be divided
into GE and AHP, like the Eser Sefirot de Se’arot.
The Koma that emerged by the ascent of MAN to Nikvey Eynaim has
already been shown to be only Komat ZA, with the GAR missing,
called YESHSUT, because Behina Bet de Hitlabshut remains there, as
in the previous Partzufim. It is divided into two Behinot: GE to
Behinat Rosh, and AHP to Behinat Sof. Their place is from Chazeh de
SAG down, where the Rosh, which is Behinat GE, expands from
Chazeh to Tabur de SAG. In and of itself, it is named YESHSUT, and
AHP de Nekudim, which are GAR de Nekudim, expand from the Tabur
down.
It is written, “After the above-mentioned Tzimtzum and Parsa, it is
found that there are many Orot there in the place of the Chazeh,
and their ascent for Mayin Nukvin was beneficial there.” it means
that after YESHSUT departed from Nikvey Eynaim, descended and
expanded from the place of the Chazeh to Tabur, the Orot increased
there in the place of the Chazeh.
You already know that Parsa consists of two Behinot: Behina Dalet
and Behina Bet. It has been explained above that sometimes Behina

--- PAGE 255 ---
Dalet descends from the Parsa, the Parsa is fissured and the Gevul is
canceled.
This Hitpashtut of YESHSUT from the place of the Chazeh to Tabur
caused the descent of Behina Dalet from the Parsa, because it became
MAN to the Taamim de SAG. Then, the Inner AB inside the Rosh de
Taamim de SAG mated with Rosh de SAG, called AHP (see Ohr Pnimi
item 1), as Ohr de Awzen is clothed in Galgalta de SAG.
The lower Hey came back down from Nikvey Eynaim de SAG to the
place of the Peh through this Zivug de AB and SAG, meaning Malchut
de Rosh, as it was in the beginning. Then the Zivug was made in Peh
de Rosh on Behina Dalet there, and a new Koma emerged from Peh de
Rosh SAG up to Keter.
This new Ohr came down from there to YESHSUT in the place of the
Chazeh, and lowered Behina Dalet in Behinat Nikvey Eynaim too,
which is the place of Tabur. It lowered her to the place of the Peh,
being Malchut de Rosh in the Sium of GAR de Nekudim. Because of
that, GAR de Nekudim, which are originally AHP de YESHSUT, joined
with YESHSUT in the Chazeh, which is their GE, and together they
became Behinat Eser Sefirot of one Rosh in Komat Keter.
This is so because now the Zivug is made on Behina Dalet that
descended to Malchut at the Sium of GAR de Nekudim. This is the
meaning of the new Ohr that fissured that Parsa that the Rav presents
afterwards.
Now we have thoroughly clarified the two Zivugim for the purpose of
Nekudim. From the first Zivug came only Behinat Katnut of the
Nekudim, meaning only Komat ZA, without GAR. This Zivug was
made in the Nikvey Eynaim, taking AHP de Rosh out into Behinat Guf.
Similarly, two Behinot Rosh and Guf, called YESHSUT also came out
in the Koma that came out of there on its Behinat Nikvey Eynaim.
From Nikvey Eynaim up it is called YESHSUT, and the point of Tabur
is Behinat Nikvey Eynaim where YESHSUT ends.

--- PAGE 256 ---
Also, from Nikvey Eynaim down, meaning from Tabur down, the
Awzen Hotem Peh of YESHSUT expanded, which are the GAR de
Nekudim. Know, that although the new Ohr that came out of this first
Zivug lacks GAR, it is still the essence and the Atzmut of the Ohr of
the Nekudim.
The second Zivug made for the purpose of Nekudim extended the GAR
and the Mochin to them. This Zivug was made by two Partzufim: AB
and SAG. The separation caused by the Tzimtzum of NHY and their
ascent to Nikvey Eynaim was reunited through this Zivug.
In other words, the GE and AHP that were separated from each other
into Rosh and Guf, were reunited by the Zivug de AB SAG and became
Eser Sefirot of one Rosh once more. This is so because the lower Hey
was removed from the Nikvey Eynaim to the place of Peh as in the
beginning. Thus the Parsa broke, which is the place of the new Sium
for SAG in the place of Hochma of the ending Eser Sefirot, being the
origin of the Tabur.
Now this new Gevul has been canceled, because as Behina Dalet came
down from Nikvey Eynaim to the place of the Peh in Rosh de SAG, so
Behina Dalet came down from the place of Tabur and the Parsa to the
place of Sium Raglin de AK, as in the beginning.
15. Then these Orot from its Tabur down that rose in the place of the
Chazeh were there as Mayin Nukvin to the Nukva, which are
Taamim de SAG, and through these MAN was the aforementioned
Zivug.
A new Ohr was procreated by this Zivug and this new Ohr came
down and fissured that Parsa. This is so because above her, in the
place of the Chazeh there are now many Orot, and the place hasn’t
the strength to tolerate them.
Thus, the Parsa fissured and the Ohr descended through there
from Tabur down, and filled that entire place that was empty of
this newborn Ohr. This is the meaning of the verse in the Zohar
(Bereshit): “draws from above, and gives below.”

--- PAGE 257 ---
16. Indeed, the Ohr that was first down and ascended, remained after
that forever in the Chazeh and did not come down in the Parsa.
However, since they are tight up there, they elicited branches from
them, through the Eynaim, which are the Nekudim that expanded
outside AK from Tabur to Sium Raglin, and this is their essence.
However, that new Ohr that descended in its Pnimiut through the
Parsa too, fissured the Kli and the Guf of AK and illuminated in
these Nekudim, both through holes in the hair, and through the
Tabur and the Yesod. It turns out that this new Ohr fissures twice:
once through the Parsa and a second time through the walls of the
Kelim of AK.
Ohr Pnimi
16. Fissures twice: once through the Parsa and a second time through
the walls of the Kelim of AK.
The first fissuring was made for NHY de AK themselves, because
Parsa limited and ended Atzilut de SAG so that no Ohr descend from
the Parsa down anymore, and the Kelim de ZON in these NHY were
emptied of Ohr. Now, through the second Zivug de AB SAG, this
Gevul de Parsa has been lifted.
Consequently, the Orot extending from this Zivug into the Kelim de
ZON there, expanded once more, which is called the first fissuring.
The second fissuring was made for Nekudim, meaning through the
Tabur and Yesod that these Orot de ZON de AK ha Pnimi illuminated
to the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim.
17. *However the first Ohr that was down in the beginning and then
ascended, did not descend again. It remained there from Tabur up
and laid its Shoresh there for good.
From there it expanded and went out through the Eynaim, and
these are the Nekudim. It continued to expand and stretch from
without until the Sium Raglin of AK.
Thus, all the Ohr extending through Tabur, though it is from
Behinat Eynaim, is all swallowed and incorporated in Akudim,

--- PAGE 258 ---
hence becoming indistinguishable. However, only the Ohr that
extends below Tabur to its Raglaim is called Nekudot, as now it
stands alone.
Ohr Pnimi
17. The first Ohr that was first down and then ascended did not
descend again.
It has been clarified in the above item that through the Zivug of AB
with SAG, the lower Hey descended from the place of the Tabur to
Bina de Nekudim, being the general Peh de Rosh de YESHSUT and
Nekudim. Then GE in YESHSUT and the AHP, which are KHB de
Nekudim, became one Rosh, by which Mochin de GAR extended to the
Nekudim.
The Rav tells us here that despite that, the actual Orot of YESHSUT
did not connect and join with their AHP, namely Nekudim. It is written
that the first Ohr that was there never descended again. It remained
there from Tabur up even after the second Zivug.
This occurred for two reasons:
1. That then YESHSUT too rejoined with the Taamim de SAG into a
single degree. It is so because the whole division of SAG into two
halves – Taamim (considered AB de SAG with the value of AVI), and
Nekudot (being the first Ohr, called YESHSUT, below Tabur,
considered SAG de SAG).
Thus, this entire division was because of the association of YESHSUT
with Behina Dalet. Hence, now that Behina Dalet descended back to
her place, the difference between Taamim and YESHSUT is no longer
there and they both return to the same degree as before.
2. This is because the matter of the cancellation of the Gevul de Sium
from the Parsa was only for the time being, hence the name fission.
After the Orot came down, it immediately was blocked once more.
Hence, YESHSUT cannot come down below the Parsa, even after the
descent of the lower Hey from there, because she did not come from
there permanently. Because of that, the Parsa remained as strong as

--- PAGE 259 ---
before and YESHSUT remained permanently above the Tabur, and
only its He’arah reaches, to complete the GAR de Nekudim.
18. Also, that Ohr that comes down through the Parsa a second time,
by this above Zivug fissures the Guf and the Kli de Adam Kadmon
as well, then exits and shines in these Nekudim. Thus we have to
kinds of Ohr for Nekudim.
19. There is yet another, necessary, third Ohr. When the Ohr Ayin
comes down through the Akudim, it looks at these Orot AHP; it
sucks from there and takes the Ohr to make the Kelim of the
Nekudot from them. It takes from three Orot, Orot Awzen Hotem
Peh.
Ohr Pnimi
19. It looks at this Orot AHP… …to make the Kelim of the Nekudot.
Here the Rav speaks from the perspective of the Eser Sefirot de
Se’arot, for you already know that because of the ascent of the lower
Hey to Nikvey Eynaim, the Rosh de SAG was instantly divided into
two Behinot, Rosh and Guf. GE remained in Behinat Rosh, and Awzen
Hotem Peh came out and became a Guf and a Kli for reception of the
Ohr Eynaim.
It’s been explained above that this great change did not actually occur
in Rosh de SAG, but in the branches that come out of it. In fact, only
Behinat AHP of the Se’arot departed and became Behinat Guf and a
Kli for reception of the Ohr Eynaim.
It is written, “When the Ohr Ayin comes down through Akudim, it
looks at these Orot AHP.” This means that the Ohr Eynaim is poured
and clothed in the Behinat AHP below the Eynaim because Histaklut
means bestowal and reception. Since these AHP receive Ohr Eynaim
from above downward, they stop being Behinat Rosh and become
Behinat Guf. You already know that they are not AHP de Rosh SAG
itself, but merely branches of it, called Se’arot Dikna.
These Se’arot Dikna are also regarded as two Behinot, because they
necessarily contain Eser Sefirot, as they are a complete Koma, called

--- PAGE 260 ---
Ohr Eynaim. Hence, they too are divided into GE and AHP, as their
Shoresh from which they came.
Therefore, there are three Behinot in them:
1. This is the AHP in their exit place. In AA de Atzilut they are called,
“the tips of the hair under the side-locks of the head on the right and
on the left, under the ears through the angles in the cheeks below.
From there the Dikna begins to expand, and this is the Behinat Awzen
in the place of its exit. The Behinat Hotem is called Se’arot that
surround the upper lip on the right and on the left in its exit place. The
Behinat Peh (in its exit place) is called a path in the middle of the
upper lip, under the Hotem where there is no hair.
All these three Tikkunim of Dikna are considered Behinat Rosh and
only Behinat Galgalta ve Eynaim. They are the first Behina of the
Dikna.
2. The second Behina is Behinat AHP that went out of the Rosh de
Dikna, originally considered Behinat Rosh. However, they are Ohr
Eynaim, and the act of this Ohr is to have only GE in the Rosh, and
the Awzen Hotem Peh in it are not in its Rosh, but exit to become
Behinat Guf.
Also, from this perspective the second Behina of AHP de Dikna is
considered Behinat Guf, and these AHP outside Dikna are called
Shibolet ha Zakan. They are the fourth Tikun of Dikna de AA, which
are the Se’arot hanging in the middle of the lower lip.
It is considered the place where the three corrections gather in Behinat
GE, regarded as the Rosh de Dikna. It is called the gathering place
because this Shibolet is the vessel of reception to the Orot in Rosh de
Dikna. Everything in the Rosh, which are AHP in its exit place, is
poured and gathered in this Shibolet.
3. The third Behina de Dikna is all the other Tikkunim of Dikna,
extending through the Chazeh, meaning through its completion. These
are its actual Behinat ZAT, meaning they are originally Behinat Guf
and vessels of reception.

--- PAGE 261 ---
It is written, “When the Ohr Ayin comes down, it looks at these
Orot AHP.” This means that Ohr Eynaim is poured into the AHP, for
which they become Behinat Kelim, receivers. By that they move from
being Behinat Rosh to Behinat Guf.
It is written, “and takes the Ohr to make the Kelim of the Nekudot
from them.” In other words, the Kelim de Nekudim receiving from
them must also be as their attribute, as he will explain henceforth.
20. The thing is that in this manner it’s been explained that the Orot
of the Awzen expanded to Shibolet ha Zakan, and Orot Hotem Peh
pass through there as well. Hence, when Ohr Eynaim de AK
extends through there, it must mingle with them and take their
Ohr.
Ten Nekudot are they: the first three among them take Ohr from
what extends from the Histaklut Ayin in AHP, from their place to
the place of the joining of Shibolet ha Zakan. They only receive
them in Shibolet ha Zakan because that is where they begin, and
not from what is in Shibolet ha Zakan upward.
However, the seven lower Nekudot take only what extends from
the Histaklut in the Orot of the Hotem and Peh from Shibolet ha
Zakan down. It is known that the Hotem reaches the Chazeh, and
the Peh through Tabur, and not from Shibolet ha Zakan up.
Ohr Pnimi
20. Ohr Eynaim de AK extends through there, it must mingle with
them and take their Ohr.
As said above, the forces in the Elyon are necessarily enforced in the
Tachton. It is written, “Hence, when Ohr Eynaim de AK extends
through there, it must mingle with them and take their Ohr.” This
means that the Nekudim that receive the Ohr Eynaim necessarily
passes through the AHP.
Hence, the Ohr Eynaim must take their Ohr because it will operate in
the order of their Kelim and divide by the same three Behinot that

--- PAGE 262 ---
exist in AHP de Dikna. Then it will pass them to Behinat Kelim de
Nekudim.
You should also remember that any Elyon is considered a Maatzil to
the Tachton, the cause of the Tachton. Accordingly, the AHP de Dikna
are considered Maatzil to the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim.
The first three among them take Ohr from what extends from the
Histaklut Ayin in AHP, from their place to the place of the joining
of Shibolet ha Zakan.
You already know that three Behinot are determined in each Partzuf
that extends from the Ohr Eynaim. Two are Behinot Rosh and Guf,
found in the Eser Sefirot de Rosh itself, being Galgalta and Eynaim to
the Rosh, and AHP to the Guf. The third Behina is the Guf itself,
called the “Lower Seven Sefirot”, as has been explained in the
previous item regarding Se’arot Dikna, and the Nekudim are divided
by the exact same way.
The first Behina of Nekudim, being the Behinat Galgalta ve Eynaim in
them, meaning the Rosh of the Eser Sefirot de Rosh is called Israel
Saba ve Tvuna. Its place is above Tabur, until the Chazeh. The Rav
says about it (item 17) “all the Ohr that extends through Tabur,
though it is from Behinat Eynaim, it is all swallowed and
incorporated in Akudim, hence becoming indistinguishable.”
Note, that the Rav emphasizes that even though it is from Behinat
Eynaim, it is still considered Akudim, and not Nekudim. The reason for
it is that the Aviut in the Masach is inactive when operating from
below upward. That YESHSUT is the true Behinat Rosh de Nekudim,
meaning Galgalta ve Eynaim, where the Masach on the joint Aviut
from Behina Bet and Behina Dalet stands below Nikvey Eynaim de
YESHSUT, which is the place of Tabur’s point.
Hence, no distinction of the association with Behina Dalet operates in
it, extending from the Ohr Eynaim. This is the reason it’s considered
Behinat Akudim, like the SAG, where only Behina Bet is apparent, and
where there is no distinction of the Aviut of Nekudim.

--- PAGE 263 ---
It is written, “it is all swallowed and incorporated in Akudim, hence
becoming indistinguishable.” Thus, the first Behina of Partzuf
Nekudim has been explained, called Israel Saba ve Tvuna, which is
incorporated in Akudim.
The second Behina of Partzuf Nekudim is the Behinat AHP departing
from the Rosh, which is considered its Guf. This is because they
receive and clothe the Ohr extending from Nikvey Eynaim, as in
Behina Bet of the Dikna, called Shibolet ha Zakan, the place of the
accumulation of the Orot de AHP in their exit place.
Remember and understand these external AHP, for in fact, they are
originally Bina and ZA and Malchut of the Rosh, joined with Keter
and Hochma found in the first Rosh called YESHSUT. Just because
they receive the Ohr Eynaim, they stopped being Rosh, and became
Guf, hence the name “The Second Rosh”, whereas YESHSUT is called
“The First Rosh”. This second Rosh is the Rosh of the Nekudim, called
GAR de Nekudim, but the first Rosh, YESHSUT, is considered Akudim,
not Nekudim, as the Rav says above.
The third Behina of Nekudim is the real Guf of the Nekudim, meaning
below the Peh de Rosh, like the previous Gufim in the Partzufim of
AK. They are called the seven lower Sefirot of Nekudim, like the
Tikkunim of Dikna found below Shibolet ha Zakan extending through
the Chazeh to the Tabur.
The upper area of Dikna Nimshach through the Chazeh, and the lower
area of Dikna Nimshach through the Tabur. This is so because they are
considered the seven lower Sefirot of Dikna, being ZA that contains
six Sefirot HGT NHY, and Malchut is the seventh.
The upper area of Dikna is six Sefirot, called ZA, extending from the
Hotem de Rosh. For that reason it ends at the Chazeh, because the
place of ZA is from the Chazeh to Shibolet ha Zakan. The lower area
of Dikna is Malchut, whose Kli is from Chazeh to Tabur, hence
ending at the Tabur. The seven lower Sefirot of Nekudim are similar,
being ZA that contains six Sefirot, and Malchut being the seventh.

--- PAGE 264 ---
It is written, “The first three among them take Ohr from what
extends from the Histaklut Ayin in AHP, from their place to the
place of the joining of Shibolet ha Zakan.” It explains that GAR de
Nekudim are Behinat AHP coming out of the Rosh. They become
vessels of reception on the Ohr that descends from above downward
from Nikvey Eynaim of the first Rosh like Shibolet ha Zakan that
receives from Behinat Nikvey Eynaim of the first Rosh de Dikna.
These are AHP in their place, meaning three Tikkunim Elyonim of
Dikna that depend on the Etzem (bone) of the Rosh above the Peh, on
the right and on the left. The path without the hair in the middle of the
upper lip and these three are called AHP in their place, meaning they
are above the Peh. The Malchut in them is still regarded from below
upward, as the upper cheek, and they are Behinat Galgalta ve Eynaim.
The Masach in the Eynaim is the upper lip, but Shibolet ha Zakan,
connected to the lower lip, is already Behinat Guf, though from
Behinat AHP that went outside to the Rosh.
It is known that the entire amount of Ohr found in the Rosh of the
Partzuf descends and pours to the Guf. It turns out that all the Orot of
the three upper Tikkunim of Dikna, being Behinat AHP in their place,
come down and pour and connect to Shibolet ha Zakan.
This is why he says that in Shibolet ha Zakan the rest of the Orot AHP
in their place through the Shibolet, connect. Also, from it, they are the
GAR de Nekudim. Remember these words for the rest of the Rav’s
words.
They only receive them in Shibolet ha Zakan because that is where
they begin.
It has already been explained elaborately that GAR de Nekudim are not
the actual Behinat Rosh of Nekudim. Rather, they are considered the
second Rosh, which are the Behinat AHP that exit the first Rosh, being
Behinat Shibolet ha Zakan.
It is written, “because that is where they begin, and not from what
is in Shibolet ha Zakan upward.” This is so because above Shibolet

--- PAGE 265 ---
ha Zakan it is Behinat first Rosh. Also, the first Rosh de Nekudim,
being YESHSUT, receives from there. However, GAR de Nekudim
have no hold there, for they are evaluated as Guf.
The seven lower Nekudot do not take but only what extends from
the Histaklut in the Orot of the Hotem and Peh from Shibolet ha
Zakan down.
It’s been explained that the seven points are the real Behinat Guf of
Partzuf Nekudim, meaning the above third Behina. Hence they receive
from below, from Shibolet ha Zakan, being from the two areas of
Dikna, through the Chazeh and through the Tabur, regarded as the
Seven Lower Sefirot.
21. We therefore find that three points take He’arah for their Kelim
from the three Orot AHP, specifically in the Shibolet. However,
ZAT take only from two Orot, Hotem and Peh, from the Shibolet
down to the Tabur. This is so because the Ohr of the Upper Awzen
has already ended and was blocked at Shibolet ha Zakan, and thus
the He’arah of the three upper points is greater than the seven
lower ones.
Ohr Pnimi
21. The Ohr of the Upper Awzen has already ended and was blocked
at Shibolet ha Zakan.
Three Kelim are distinguished from Tabur up, made by the Histalkut
Orot (see Part 5, item 27). Kli Malchut from Tabur to Chazeh was
made in the Histalkut Ohr Malchut to ZA, and when Ohr ZA departed,
Kli de ZA was made from Chazeh to the Shibolet. When Ohr Bina
departed, Kli de Bina was made in the place of the Shibolet.
It turns out that Ohr Bina ends in the place of the Shibolet because she
doesn’t have a Kli below Shibolet ha Zakan, Ohr ZA ends at the
Chazeh and Ohr Malchut at the Tabur. This is why it is written that
the Ohr of the Upper Awzen ended and was blocked at Shibolet ha
Zakan.

--- PAGE 266 ---
There is yet another reason for the blocking of the Ohr de Awzen in
the place of Shibolet ha Zakan: indeed, Shibolet ha Zakan and Parsa
are one. They are both made of the force of Tzimtzum NHY and the
ascent of the lower Hey to the Eynaim. After all, the AHP departed
into Behinat Guf, and consequently, Behinat Peh descended and
became Behinat Tabur, where the Parsa was placed.
The difference is that the Peh originates in Malchut de Rosh, and
descended to Behinat Tabur only because of its reception into the Ohr
Eynaim. Parsa, on the other hand, is in the place of the original Tabur,
which was Behinat Tabur in the Partzufim preceding the Ohr Eynaim
too.
It turns out that just as there is Parsa in the original Tabur of the
general AK, above its NHY, which are ZON, so there is Parsa above
Mazla, which are Behinat NHY and ZON de Dikna. The upper area is
ZA and the lower area is Malchut, and both together are called Mazla.
This Parsa above Mazla is Shibolet ha Zakan. As Parsa ends SAG and
stops above Tabur and the Parsa, so Shibolet ha Zakan ends the Ohr
Awzen, being Behinat SAG in the Rosh. It does not shine below the
Shibolet, but only Hotem Peh de Rosh, which are ZON, as in NHY of
the general AK. Hence, the Ohr of the Upper Awzen is blocked at
Shibolet ha Zakan in such a way that there is no He’arat GAR there,
namely Ohr de Awzen, but only VAK, without GAR, namely only
Behinat Hotem Peh.
22. For this reason, the first three Melachim did not die, since they
have a great He’arah and their Kli is very fine, as it is made of
Behinat Upper Awzen, the Hotem and the Peh. Their Kelim were
made in Histaklut Ayin in Orot de Awzen Hotem Peh, because they
took their Kelim from a place were Orot de Awzen, which are
Behinat Neshama, are still drawn, being Shibolet ha Zakan.
However, the Seven Lower Melachim died because their Kelim
were made only of Histaklut Ayin in Hotem Peh, lacking the Upper
Awzen.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 267 ---
22. It is written (item 22), “For this reason, the first three Melachim did
not die.” It is so because they had Ohr de GAR from the beginning of
their creation, meaning Ohr Awzen, which is Ohr Bina.
“However, the Seven Lower Melachim died” because they do not
have from the Ohr GAR in the beginning of their creation. For that
reason they could not tolerate the He’arat GAR that came to them
from Yesod de AK.
23. Thus, even in GAR themselves there is a division between this and
that. It is so because not even the Achoraim descended from Keter,
but only the Achoraim of NHY. However, in AVI of Nekudim, their
Achoraim descended alone, and their Panim remained in their
place.
The reason for it is that these Orot, extending through Shibolet ha
Zakan, were divided into three: Keter took from Behinat Awzen
herself, from what the Reiah elicits in the Histaklut in the Ohr
Awzen, especially that two other Orot mingle with it. From that the
Kli for Keter Nekudim was made. Abba took from what the Reiah
elicits from the Orot Hotem, and the Ohr Peh was also
incorporated in it.
Ohr Pnimi
23. Keter took from Behinat Awzen herself, from what the Reiah elicits
in the Histaklut in the Ohr Awzen, especially that two other Orot
mingle with it.
In order to thoroughly understand the attribute of these three Sefirot
Keter, Hochma, Bina, that the Rav explains here, we must understand
the order of the creation of this Partzuf called Nekudim.
You must remember the Rav’s words above (Part 5, items 6-14)
regarding the creation of Partzuf AB from the two upper Reshimot of
Partzuf Galgalta de AK, including everything explained in Ohr Pnimi
there. We shall only mention the headlines here, as it explained there
that the emanation of each Tachton is because of the Histalkut Orot
from the Guf de Elyon.

--- PAGE 268 ---
In that state, the Reshimot of the Sefirot of the Upper Guf incorporate
in the Masach de Tabur Elyon, purified to its Shoresh, called Peh,
which is then incorporated in the Upper Zivug in the Rosh. The Koma
elicited by that Zivug is regarded as the Partzuf Tachton.
It has also been explained that the last Behina does not leave a
Reshimo of her Aviut after her, but only from Behinat Hitlabshut.
Thus, the Reshimot that rose to Peh of the first Partzuf lacked the
Reshimo de Behina Dalet from Behinat Hamshacha. It is left with
only Reshimo de Behinat Hitlabshut, unfit for Zivug with the Ohr
Elyon, as it lacks the Aviut.
This is where the Shoresh for the Behinat Zachar and Nekeva in the
Olamot is made. The Reshimo de Behinat Hitlabshut that always
remains after the Histalkut Orot de Guf Elyon is considered Zachar. It
means that it is a part of the Guf unfit to draw Ohr Elyon, except by
collaboration with the Nekeva, which complements what it lacks.
That was also the case with Reshimo de Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut,
which associated with Behina Gimel. Thus, the Zachar was completed
in Behinat Hamshacha too, by the force of Aviut de Behina Gimel. At
that point, the Upper Zivug emerged on it, meaning on the Masach
that’s made of the two Reshimot: Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut and
Behina Gimel de Hamshacha.
The Rav explains there, that they perform two Zivugim by way of
Hitkalelut. In the first Zivug, the Nekeva, being Behina Gimel, is
incorporated in the Zachar, being Behina Dalet. At that time they
elicit Komat Keter Elyon, because the Zivug on Aviut de Behina Dalet
elicits Komat Keter.
However, since it lacks Behina Dalet de Hamshacha, it cannot come
down to the Guf, meaning to Behinat Hitlabshut in the Kelim. This is
because there is no Hitpashtut Kelim, but only in Behinat Aviut,
meaning by the force of the Hamshacha. This is what Behina Dalet
lacks and hence its need a second Zivug.
This is done by the Hitkalelut of the Zachar in the Nekeva, meaning in
Behina Gimel, where there is Behinat Hamshacha. However, the

--- PAGE 269 ---
Koma emanated by that Zivug is merely Komat Hochma. After these
two Zivugim are made, they can come down and clothe in the Guf, and
they clothe in Kli de Keter of the Guf.
It is the same in all the Partzufim because so also was the order of the
creation of Partzuf SAG from AB. There too the last Behina that
remained after the Histalkut Orot de Guf de AB was only in Behinat
Hitlabshut, called Zachar, meaning Behinat Hitlabshut de Behina
Gimel.
This is so because the last Behina de AB is Behina Gimel, and it too
must connect with the Nekeva to complete its Behinat Hamshacha and
be suitable for Zivug with the Ohr Elyon. Hence, it joined with Behina
Bet, which remained complete in Behinat Hamshacha too. At that time
they were both incorporated in two Zivugim, as has been explained in
Rosh de Partzuf Galgalta.
The same occurred in the creation of Partzuf BON, being Olam ha
Nekudim, which was emanated and emerged from Rosh de SAG. After
Orot NHY de AK departed with the lower nine Sefirot de SAG, the last
Behina disappeared here too. She did not leave behind a Reshimo de
Hamshacha, but only from Behinat Hitlabshut, called Zachar, which
is unfit for Zivug with the Ohr Elyon, except when associated in the
Behinat Hamshacha of the Nekeva, which is merely Behina Aleph
here.
This is so because the last Behina de Partzuf SAG is Behina Bet, of
which nothing remained but Behinat Hitlabshut. It turns out that the
complete Reshimo is Behina Aleph.
These Zachar and Nekeva rose to Nikvey Eynaim and incorporated
there in the two above Zivugim, as with the AB and the SAG. In the
first Zivug, the Nekeva was incorporated in the Zachar, which is
Behina Bet de Hitlabshut. Then Komat Bina was elicited on them, as it
is known that Behina Bet extends Komat Bina.
It turns out that the Nekeva too, which is Komat Behina Aleph gained
Behinat GAR in her Hitkalelut with the Zachar. However, they still
could not descend to the Guf, for lack of the Aviut of Hamshacha from

--- PAGE 270 ---
Behina Bet. They made the second Zivug, and the Zachar was
incorporated in the Nekeva, which is Behina Aleph, and extended
Komat ZA. Afterwards they descended to Behinat Hitlabshut in the
Guf, as the Rav explained regarding Partzuf AB (see Part 5, item 14).
Now you can thoroughly understand the property of GAR de Nekudim.
Keter de Nekudim is the Zachar, being Behina Bet de Hitlabshut, and
Hochma and Bina de Nekudim are both Nekeva, which are Behina
Aleph. They were incorporated in one another in the two Zivugim de
Rosh de SAG.
From there they came down through Dikna to their place below Tabur
and expanded into their own Partzuf, meaning to the above three
Behinot, made of two Roshim (pl. for Rosh) and Guf. The first Rosh is
YESHSUT, only in Behinat GE, and the second Rosh is GAR de
Nekudim, which are the AHP that came out of the first Rosh. These are
the ZAT de Nekudim.
You can therefore understand Partzuf Dikna too. It’s been explained
that every Tachton emerges by the force of the Reshimot ascending
from the Histalkut Orot de Elyon to Malchut de Rosh of the Elyon
itself. These are Behinat Zachar and Nekeva, and in the beginning
they incorporate in the Masach de Rosh de Elyon and make two
Zivugim there, in two kinds of Hitkalelut.
There they extend two Komot: the first Koma on the measure of the
Zachar, and the second Koma on the measure of the Nekeva. All this
takes place in the Rosh of the Elyon itself. After that they expand and
descend to their correct place.
Know, that these two Komot that the Zachar and the Nekeva of
Partzuf Nekudim extended when they were in Rosh de SAG are the
entire Partzuf Dikna in the Rosh de SAG itself. Despite that, they are
indistinguishable in Rosh de SAG itself, only in the branches that
come out of it, being the Se’arot.
Now you see that the first Tikun of Dikna, being the two straits of the
Zakan, extending under the Awznaim, is the Zachar. In other words, it

--- PAGE 271 ---
is the Koma that emerged in the Hitkalelut of the Nekeva that emerged
in the measure of the Zachar, whose Koma reaches Bina.
The two lower Tikkunim are the Se’arot on the upper lip under the
Hotem on the right and on the left. After that there is the path without
the hair in the middle, extending in a straight Kav in the middle of the
lip, under the Hotem, to the Peh. Both are the Nekeva of the Rosh,
meaning Koma de Behina Aleph that emerged in the Hitkalelut of the
Zachar with the Nekeva.
It has already been explained that the Nekeva too has Komat Bina, for
she mingled in the first Zivug in the measure of the Zachar. However,
there is still a great difference between them. This is so because the
Zachar itself is Behina Bet, and thus has Ohr Bina, while the Nekeva
is only Behina Aleph in and of herself, which is Ohr ZA.
Consequently, she has He’arah only from Ohr Bina, but not the
Atzmut of Ohr Bina.
Thus, all the Orot de Zachar and Nekeva in these three Tikkunim come
in Hitlabshut in Shibolet ha Zakan, which is the AHP that came out
into Behinat Guf. Hence, these two above-mentioned Komot are
discerned in the three upper Tikkunim of Dikna in Shibolet ha Zakan.
It is written, “Keter took from Behinat Awzen herself, from what the
Reiah elicits in the Histaklut in the Ohr Awzen.” This is because
Keter de Nekudim is Behinat Zachar, having Koma de Behina Bet.
For that reason it extends from the Histaklut in the Ohr de Awzen,
meaning from the Zivug that emerged on Komat Bina, which is the
Ohr of the Awzen. From there it extended to the Zachar in Behinat
Shibolet ha Zakan, and from Shibolet ha Zakan it descended to its
place below Tabur, to Behinat Keter de Nekudim. Thus, Keter has the
Etzem of the Ohr Awzen.
It is written, “Abba took from the Reiah elicits from the Orot
Hotem, and the Ohr Peh was also incorporated in it.” Abba de
Nekudim is Behinat Nekeva, having only Behina Aleph. Ima de
Nekudim is also incorporated in Abba, for both are considered Behinat
Nekeva to the Keter.

--- PAGE 272 ---
Hence, for itself, it has only Ohr Hotem, which is Ohr ZA, as Behina
Aleph elicits only Komat ZA. In addition, the Ohr Peh, which is
Malchut, was also incorporated in the Ohr of the Hotem, because they
are one Koma that came out in the second Zivug, on the measure of
the Nekeva.
24. The Kli of Keter, which took its great He’arah from the Awzen, did
not break. However, AVI, which take only from the Hotem and the
Peh, the Achoraim of their Kelim broke.
If Abba ve Ima had received this Ohr Hotem and Peh of AK when
they were above, close to the place of the Nikvey Awzen, though
they only received a little He’arah from the Orot Awzen itself, the
Achoraim of their Kelim would have endured.
However, because they receive only from the Sium of the Awzen,
being the place of Shibolet ha Zakan, though they take some
He’arah, it doesn’t help them, and hence the Achoraim of their
Kelim break. However, Keter takes the actual Ohr Awzen. Although
it takes it at its Sium, since it takes its Atzmut, it is still enough.
Consequently, even its Achoraim do not break.
Conversely, AVI take only a general He’arah, and even that in
remoteness of location. Thus we have clarified these three Behinot,
which are: Keter, that remained entirely; AVI, which broke and
their Achoraim fell; ZON, whose Achoraim and Panim fell.
Ohr Pnimi
24. It is written, “If Abba ve Ima had…” but since they only receive from
the Sium of the Awzen, the place of Shibolet ha Zakan, even though
they take some He’arah, it doesn’t help them. That is why the
Achoraim of their Kelim break.
In fact, they were incorporated in the first Zivug on the measure of the
Zachar, at which time they also acquired the Ohr Koma de Behina Bet
of the Zachar, in which case AVI too have He’arat Awzen, like the
Zachar. However, as has been explained above, in and of themselves
they are merely Reshimo of Behina Aleph. Hence, this Hitkalelut with

--- PAGE 273 ---
the Zachar is merely Behinat He’arah de Ohr Awzen, not Atzmut, as
the Zachar.
Had they received this He’arah “when they were close to the place
of the Nikvey Awzen,” meaning if AVI de Nekudim were Behinat
Nekeva in the first Rosh de Dikna, which are the two Tikkunim called
Se’arot of the lip, and the Orcha (Path), then their Achoraim certainly
wouldn’t have broken, like the first Rosh of Nekudim called
YESHSUT, which endured entirely.
However, because they are Behinat second Rosh, and take only from
the Behinat Shibolet, and also have no Atzmut Ohr Awzen, but only
He’arah, their Achoraim break.
It is written, “However, Keter takes the actual Ohr Awzen. Although
it takes it at its Sium, since it takes its Atzmut, it is still enough.
Consequently, even its Achoraim do not break.” It means that Keter
is the Zachar, having Koma de Behina Bet by itself. Hence the Ohr
Awzen is considered its Atzmut. The matter of the difference between
the Achoraim and the Panim will be explained in its place.
Now you can thoroughly understand the matter of the Ohr Awzen that
was blocked on the Shibolet, brought in the Rav’s words above (Part
6, item 21). The two reasons in the Ohr Pnimi have already been
explained there. Here we find, regarding the Zachar and Nekeva in the
Ohr of the Eynaim, that even the Zachar does not have a complete
Behina Bet, only half this Reshimo, meaning only the Behinat
Hitlabshut in it.
Hence, there was no Behinat Hitpashtut in the Kelim from the first
Zivug that emerged on Komat Bina (see Part 6, Ohr Pnimi, item 23).
Even after the second Zivug in the Hitkalelut of the Zachar with the
Nekeva, they descended and expanded to the Guf, which are the
exterior AHP, called Shibolet in the Dikna, and GAR de Nekudim in
Partzuf Nekudim. However, then too they could not shine the Ohr
Bina into the Kelim below them, because of the absence of Behinat
Aviut de Hamshacha that exists in Behina Bet.

--- PAGE 274 ---
For that reason the Ohr Awzen was blocked in the Shibolet, which is
the Kli of these ZON, as they cannot give from their Ohr Bina.
Similarly, in GAR de Nekudim the Ohr Awzen was blocked in the
Bina, and they cannot give anything outside them.
This has been explained in detail above (Part 5, Ohr Pnimi, item 40).
Here too it is considered that Ohr Bina remains in the Rosh under
Malchut de Rosh, as the Ohr Keter in AB, and as Ohr Hochma in SAG,
because the whole issue there applies here too.
25. *These Nekudim expanded from Tabur de AK to its Sium Raglaim,
as in the arrangement of ZON, clothing AA. However, there ZON
clothes AA all around its sides and surroundings, whereas here,
their primary He’arah is only through Panim de AK.
Yet, some He’arah expands from these Nekudim, whether in their
Behinat Orot, or in their Behinat Kelim, clothing this AK on every
side, as we’ve explained above in the AHP. Still, their primary
He’arah is through the Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
25. Their primary He’arah is only through Panim de AK. Yet, some
He’arah expands from these Nekudim etc.
This matter has already been explained in detail (Part 4, Chap 5, Ohr
Pnimi, item 2) and study it there. The gist of it is that the sides are
Behinat right and left in the Partzuf. In other words, multiplicity of
Hassadim is called “Right” and scarcity of Hassadim is called “Left”.
The place of the reception of Hochma and GAR is called Panim, and
the place unfit to receive GAR is called Achor. Hence, the Rosh and
Toch of every Partzuf through the Tabur is called Panim because until
the Tabur it is fit to receive Ohr GAR, and the place from Tabur down
is called Achor because it cannot receive GAR there.
You already know of the new Tzimtzum that occurred by the ascent of
MAN to Nikvey Eynaim. AHP de Rosh departed from there and
became Behinat Guf, and the Peh became Behinat Sium on He’arat

--- PAGE 275 ---
GAR, like the Tabur. This is why the Ohr de Awzen was blocked at the
Shibolet.
This is also the reason that He’arat Ohr Eynaim is called Panim, as
they do not shine for Kelim de Achor from the Peh down, but only
Behinat small He’arah, through the sides, extending from Behinat
“right and “left”, meaning He’arat Hassadim.
26. The place of Keter from the Nekudot is from Tabur de AK through
the Sium of the Guf. HBD are in the first three Prakin de NHY de
AK, HGT in the three middle Prakin, and NHY in the three lower
Prakin, as in ZON that clothes over AA.
Ohr Pnimi
26. HBD are in the first three Prakin de NHY de AK, HGT in the three
middle Prakin etc.
There are four divisions that you find here: Keter, Hochma Bina Daat,
Hesed Gevura Tifferet, Netzah Hod Yesod. In order to understand that
we must first know the two changes here regarding the Partzufim
Galgalta AB SAG preceding Partzuf Nekudim.
The first is the matter of Kli de Daat, which did not exist in the Eser
Sefirot. Thus, where did it come from here in the Eser Sefirot de
Nekudim? The second is the matter of the Guf of Partzuf Nekudim.
The Rav says about the Gufim of the three preceding Partzufim that
they begin from Keter, as in Part 5 regarding Matei ve Lo Matei.
However, here he says that the Guf begins from Kli de Daat, not from
Keter. He counts only the seven lower Sefirot as the entire Guf, and
not the Eser Sefirot, meaning only Daat, HGT and NHYM.
The thing is that you already know that the GAR of Nekudim are
Behinat AHP de Israel Saba ve Tvuna, being the first Rosh of
Nekudim. Because of the lower Hey that rose to the Eynaim, and the
place of the Zivug that ascended to Nikvey Eynaim, the AHP of this
Rosh became a vessel of reception and Guf. This Guf de AHP are the
GAR of Nekudim.

--- PAGE 276 ---
Thus, the two Kelim, Keter and Hochma de Rosh remained in
YESHSUT as Behinat Rosh Aleph, and the three Kelim Bina, ZA and
Malchut, came in GAR de Nekudim and were made into the second
Rosh. They are the Rosh of Nekudim.
You already know that the entire amount in the Rosh passes and
clothes in the Guf as well. It turns out that since there are only three
Kelim Bina, ZA and Malchut in Rosh de Nekudim, the Guf too has no
more than these three Kelim, since everything that exists in the Guf
must be received from the Rosh.
Hence, Guf de Nekudim has only the seven lower Sefirot, which are
Bina and the five Kelim of ZA, as Netzah and Hod are for one Kli here,
and Kli Malchut is the seventh. However, in the three previous
Partzufim Galgalta AB SAG, meaning before the Eser Sefirot were
divided into two degrees and the Eser Sefirot were complete in the
Rosh, this entire amount passed to the Guf too. Hence their Gufim had
Eser Sefirot from Keter to Malchut as well.
The matter of the renewal of Sefirat Daat in the Eser Sefirot has also
been explained: it comes from Behinat misplacement of the Orot. In
Partzuf AB, Ohr Hochma clothed in Kli de Keter, Ohr Bina in Kli de
Hochma, and Ohr Hesed in Kli de Bina etc. This Ohr Hesed, clothed
in Kli de Bina, became Sefirat Daat, which is the MAN de Bina.
The matter of Hitlabshut Ohr Hesed, which is Komat ZA in Kli de
Bina, considers that Bina descended to the degree of ZA. As brought in
the Rav’s words above regarding the Zivug de Komat Hochma (Part 5
item 12), due to the misplacement of the above Orot, there was a
decline in all the degrees. Keter came down to the degree of Hochma,
and Hochma to the degree of Bina.
We find that because of Hitlabshut Ohr ZA in Kli de Bina, Bina’s
name was changed into Sefirat Daat. You can therefore understand the
matter of the exit of Ohr ZA from inside AK to the outside, which the
Rav speaks of henceforth.
You will find that in the inner Partzuf, called Galgalta de AK, there
was Ohr ZA in Kli de ZA, as it should have been. However, in Partzuf

--- PAGE 277 ---
AB de AK, Ohr ZA rose and clothed Kli de Bina, and in Partzuf SAG
de AK, Ohr ZA rose and clothed Kli de Hochma. In Partzuf Nekudim,
Ohr ZA rose to Kli de Keter.
It is written above that a Partzuf that exits the Ohr Eynaim has only
Komat Behina Aleph, being the Komat Nekeva de Keter, which is the
primary Ohr. However, Komat Bina in the Zachar does not expand
below GAR de Nekudim.
We could therefore say that since its been shown that Behinat Keter de
Nekudim is merely Kli de Bina, because Rosh Aleph took Keter and
Hochma, Keter de Nekudim should have been called Sefirat Daat.
Also, it’s been written that Ohr ZA in Kli de Bina is called Daat.
The answer is that since it is Behinat Rosh, it is called Keter in and of
itself. However, it also consists of a second Zivug in Komat Behina
Aleph, which is Ohr ZA. Therefore, this is still not considered here
that Ohr ZA came out, but only in Olam Atzilut, for there it clothed in
Kli de Keter, and is considered to have come outside.
Now you will see that since the Kli de Bina of the Guf has nothing of
the Ohr Bina, as Ohr Bina ends and is blocked at the GAR, its name is
therefore changed to Daat, as it has none of the Ohr Bina. Thus, the
reason that Sefirat Daat came out in Olam ha Nekudim, is because
here the Kli de Bina de Guf was made completely empty of her own
Ohr. Also, you find that the reason the Guf of Nekudim has only the
lower seven Sefirot is because only these three are also at the Rosh,
namely Bina, ZA and Malchut.
This is the root for the division of NHY into three thirds. They follow
the three Sefirot Bina, ZA and Malchut of Partzuf Nekudim, clothing
Netzah Hod Yesod de AK. The Rosh of the NHY are Behinat Bina, and
the Toch of the NHY, which are the middle Prakin, are Behinat ZA,
and the Sof of the NHY, which are the lower Prakin, are Behinat
Malchut.
The reason for the division is that because in this entire Partzuf that
shines in NHY de AK, there are no more than these three Sefirot. This
is because Keter and Hochma in them remained above Tabur, in

--- PAGE 278 ---
YESHSUT above the Parsa, considered Akudim and is not counted
among the Sefirot de Nekudim.
However, the Rav counts four divisions here: Keter, HBD, HGT, NHY.
This is because there were two times in this Partzuf of Nekudim:
Katnut and Gadlut. In the beginning of their creation, they emerged in
Katnut, because they came out of Nikvey Eynaim, on Komat Behina
Aleph, which is merely Ohr ZA. However, afterwards there was a
second Zivug of the AB and SAG, as the Rav says, and the Mochin de
Gadlut de Nekudim came out, being the GAR.
That is why the Rav divides them now by an order of Tikun Kavim. ZA
that clothes AA de Atzilut, meaning Hochma, Hesed, Netzah is in the
right line, Bina, Gevura and Hod, on the left line, and Keter, Daat,
Tifferet, Yesod in the middle line.
Yet, in the beginning of their emanation, the lower seven only came
out in one line, one by one, as the Rav writes henceforth. It turns out
that the Rav speaks of the Gadlut de Nekudim [a second version:
emendation from the manuscript of the author Baal HaSulam: This is
perplexing since there was no Tikun Kavim in VAK, but here he gives
an example from ZA de Atzilut and NHY de AA].
It is written that Keter from the Nekudot clothes from Tabur de AK to
Sium of the Guf, and HBD are in the first three Prakin de NHY de AK.
It turns out the one Rosh, meaning GAR de Nekudim, were separated
from one another because the Keter clothes Tifferet de AK and HB
clothe the Roshim de Yarchin de AK, and we must understand that.
Moreover, where did Sefirat Daat come to Rosh de Nekudim from?
After all, the Rav will count it henceforth among the seven lower
Sefirot of ZA. The thing is that you know that GAR de Nekudim are
Behinat AHP that came out of the Rosh. Keter is Behinat Awzen and
Bina, HB are Hotem and Peh, meaning ZA and Nukva. ZA in Behinat
Tikun Kavim is in Behinat Hesed Gevura Tifferet, and the Nukva is
NHY.
It’s been explained above that through the Zivug de AB SAG, Behina
Dalet descended from the Nikvey Eynaim to the Peh as in the

--- PAGE 279 ---
beginning, the AHP rose to the Rosh once more, and Ohr GAR came
down to them (see Part 6, item 14 and Ohr Pnimi, item 17). It explains
there that despite that, no change was made in the previous situation,
and YESHSUT did not return and descended below Tabur because of
that, only its He’arah.
Hence, this Behinat GAR is Behinat HGT that became HBD. It means
that Hotem Peh that were on Komat ZA and Malchut first, which are
ZAT, the Hesed in them returned to Behinat Rosh and now became
Hochma.
The Gevura in them that returned to the Rosh has now become Bina
and the rest of the Sefirot TNHYM now became Daat. Also, the
Behinat Awzen, which is Bina that returned to the Rosh, now became
Keter.
Thus you find how the AHP that were in GAR de Nekudim became
KHBD during the Gadlut: Awzen became Keter, and the Hochma and
Gevura in Hotem and Peh became Daat.
Know, that from here on in Atzilut there were two Behinot HGT NHY
made in each Partzuf. This is because of the AHP that went out of the
Rosh and became the Guf, being Komat ZA.
Afterwards there is Behinat genuine HGT NHY that were never in
Behinat Rosh. These two Behinot divide on the Tabur of each Partzuf
because HGT NHY, which are AHP that become the Guf, their place is
above Tabur, regarded as Behinat AVI of that Partzuf.
The genuine HGT NHY are considered ZON of that Partzuf and their
place is below Tabur. Also, HGT NHY below Tabur, which are the real
ZON, they too have that same discernment when they expand in a
Partzuf of their own, whose HGT end at the Tabur. They are
considered Behinat AHP that came out as the Rosh of that Partzuf,
meaning the real ZA. Its NHY below Tabur is its genuine Behinat HGT
, meaning that were never in its Behinat Rosh.
Now the order of the Halbasha of Partzuf Nekudim to NHY de AK that
the Rav explains here is thoroughly clarified. It has already been

--- PAGE 280 ---
explained that in its SAG de AK there was the beginning of raising of
MAN to Nikvey Eynaim, causing the exit of the AHP from the Rosh.
However, in itself there was no change, and the AHP of Rosh de SAG
did not come out of its Rosh, but is considered to have elicited a
special Partzuf of Se’arot there, where this great change occurred (see
Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 19). For that reason we do not discriminate
Behinat HGT NHY above Tabur de AK here, as in the Partzufim that
follow.
Rather, it is Behinat Akudim from its Tabur up, its Eser Sefirot
beginning from the Keter. Also, that entirely new Partzuf, where the
AHP became HGT, are considered in him as merely HGT NHY below
the Tabur of its lower Partzufim.
Thus, its Halbasha resembles ZON de Atzilut clothing below Tabur de
AA de Atzilut. Therefore, Keter de Nekudim, which is Behinat Awzen
when first emanated, namely Bina, is found clothing the lower third of
Tifferet because Sefirat Tifferet is Behinat Bina of the Hey Ktzavot on
the part of its Kli (see Part 6, Ohr Pnimi, item 41). It clothes only
below Tabur of Tifferet de AK and not above its Tabur, because there it
is Behinat Akudim, and Keter de Nekudim has no hold in Behinat
Akudim.
“HBD are in the first three Prakin de NHY de AK.” It’s been
explained in Ohr Pnimi items 42, 43, that Sefirat Netzah is the Behinat
ZA of the five Ktzavot on the part of the Kli, and Sefirat Hod is the
Behinat Malchut of the Hey Ktzavot.
Hence, the Hotem and Peh in GAR de Nekudim are ZA and Malchut
that returned to the Rosh and became Hochma and Bina. They clothe
the upper thirds of Netzah Hod de AK, which are Behinat Rosh de ZA
and Malchut, where Rosh ZA is in Netzah and Rosh Malchut in Hod.
However, now these ZA and Malchut became actual Hochma and Bina
because they returned to the Rosh, as in the beginning. Thus, Hochma
and Bina de Nekudim are proportional to the Upper Prakin of Netzah
and Hod, as from the beginning of their creation they are Behinat ZA
and Malchut, as they are.

--- PAGE 281 ---
The Daat de Nekudim clothes the Upper Perek of Yesod de AK,
interred between the Roshim de Yarchin inside the Guf, meaning in
Tifferet, which is the Kli de Bina of the five Ktzavot. This is so
because Daat is Behinat Ohr Hesed clothed in Kli de Bina.
You already know that these Hotem Peh consist of the seven lower
Sefirot, because the Hotem contains HGT NHY and the Peh is
Malchut. You also know that only HG in them became Hochma and
Bina, while the five Sefirot from Tifferet down became Behinat Daat.
It is so because Sefirat Hesed is Behinat Hochma of the five Ktzavot
from the perspective of the Ohr in it. Hence, its power is good when it
returns to Behinat Rosh, when it once more receives Behinat Hochma.
Sefirat Gevura is Behinat Bina of the Hey Ktzavot from the
perspective of her Ohr, hence she now returned to being Bina.
Sefirat Tifferet is Behinat Ohr ZA in the Hey Ktzavot. Thus, now that it
is clothed in Tifferet de AK, which is Bina, from the perspective of the
Kli, it became Sefirat Daat, clothing the Upper Perek of Yesod de AK,
clothed in Pnimiut Tifferet de AK. However, from the viewpoint of
Halbasha, it clothes only up to Yesod.
The reason is that the Behinat Kli of Yesod is from the Behinat
Malchut in the Hey Ktzavot. It is known that the Masach mating with
the Ohr Elyon is in Kli Malchut, thus having three Prakin in the Yesod.
These are the three places of Zivug: Peh, Chazeh, Yesod. For that
reason Behinat Daat in the Rosh, over which the Zivug was made,
clothes the Upper Perek of Yesod, which is Behinat Malchut de Rosh.
“HGT in the three middle Prakin, and NHY in the three lower
Prakin.” You already know that these HGT NHY are ZAT de Nekudim,
being Behinat true ZA that were never Behinat Rosh.
It has also been clarified that the real ZON are also divided on the two
Behinot on the Tabur. Above Tabur they are Behinat AHP of itself,
exiting from the Rosh, called HGT, and below Tabur they are its ZON,
where there was never Behinat Rosh, called NHY. In that proportion
the three middle Prakin and the three lower Prakin divide as well;
HGT clothe the middle Prakin and NHY the lower Prakin.

--- PAGE 282 ---
There is yet another reason, truer in this place. You already know that
HGT de Hey Ktzavot are the Behinat GAR in them, and Behinat ZA in
the Hey Ktzavot begins in Netzah from the perspective of the Kelim
and begins in Tifferet from the perspective of the Orot.
Hence, Rosh, Toch, Sof de NHY de AK are divided thus: the Rosh in
them is Behinat AHP that actually returned to the Rosh, the Toch in
them is Behinat GAR de Hey Ktzavot, meaning HGT, and the Sof in
them are VAK de VAK, being ZA and Malchut de Hey Ktzavot.
Thus we have clarified the four divisions in the Eser Sefirot de
Nekudim in them during the Gadlut. The first is Keter de Nekudim. It
is not counted here in the Partzuf, as it is Behinat Zachar of the Rosh
de Nekudim, being Behinat Bina and the Etzem Ohr Awzen, for it has
Behinat Bet de Hitlabshut.
The second are Hochma, Bina and Daat, who from the beginning of
their creation are but Ohr ZA de Rosh, called Hotem Peh that came out
of the Rosh and turned into Behinat ZA de Guf. However, during the
Gadlut they became Behinat Rosh once more, having He’arah from
the Ohr Awzen through their Hitkalelut with the Zachar.
The third are HGT de Nekudim who were never Behinat Rosh, but
from the stand point of the Hey Ktzavot, they are considered KHB.
The fourth are NHY of Nekudim, being Behinat ZA and Malchut de
Hey Ktzavot.
One might ask: Since AHP returned to the Rosh and became one with
the Galgalta ve Eynaim in it, the Hotem Peh, which are Hochma and
Bina, became one with the Keter, which is Awzen. Thus, there are only
three Behinot here.
Indeed, you should remember that there was no change performed on
the Upper Sefirot again, meaning because of their return of AVI to the
Rosh. YESHSUT, which is Behinat GE of that Rosh, remained above
Tabur in itself as in the beginning. Keter de Nekudim too, which is
Behina Bet, remained for itself as in the beginning, but only their
He’arah reached HB when they returned to the Rosh.

--- PAGE 283 ---
27. Two kinds of Ohr come out of the Guf de AK: the first from the
Tabur, and the second from the Yesod. Also, two Havalim come out
through there. It should have said that there should have been
three Havalim there, opposite the GAR that received from the
AHP, but since Ohr Awzen is absent from AVI, the Behinat Hevel
opposite the Awzen is absent too. Hence, only two Havalim come
out, opposite the Hotem and Peh alone, from which AVI received
above, and here below they also receive from them.
Ohr Pnimi
27. The Behinat Hevel opposite the Awzen is absent too. Hence, only
two Havalim come out, opposite the Hotem and Peh.
It means that only two Havalim came out of Peh of Yesod, opposite
the Hotem Peh. Those are Vav to Ima and Nekuda to Abba, as the Rav
says above. However, the Hevel of the Tabur, being opposite the Ohr
de Awzen, did not reach AVI, as they only have a hold on the Hotem
Peh, as the Rav says above.
28. However, the Ohr of the lower seven that took only from the Guf
down is from the Sium of Shibolet ha Zakan downward. Hence,
they too don’t have Havalim to shine for them, but they are
implied in the words, “and the arms of his hands were made
supple,” which is the meaning of the ten additions thrown off from
among the Tzipornaim, as mentioned in Tikun 69.
It is so because they are Behinat Melachim in and of themselves,
for the annulment of the Melachim was because he was not yet
corrected as one Adam, male and female.
Ohr Pnimi
28. The Ohr of the lower seven that took only from the Guf down is
from the Sium of Shibolet ha Zakan downward.
It’s been written (Ohr Pnimi item 20), that ZAT take from the Behinat
Tikkunim of Dikna under the Shibolet, where the Ohr of Awzen does
not reach because it ends at Shibolet ha Zakan (see Ohr Pnimi item
21).

--- PAGE 284 ---
“And the arms of his hands were made supple,” which is the
meaning of the ten additions thrown off from among the
Tzipornaim.
Even though he says that the ten Havalim came out through the
Tzipornaim of the Raglaim, why does he say that they are from the
hands here? Indeed, when it says that the ZAT took from the Havalim
that come out through the Tzipornaim of the Raglaim, it means that
they took from the Behinat Parsa ha Mesayemet to the Raglaim of
SAG. It turns out that he took from the Tzipornaim of the Raglaim.
You must remember what is written above (Ohr Pnimi item 12) that
the meaning of this Parsa is Behinat new point of Tzimtzum that
moved from the place of Malchut of the Eser Sefirot de Sium to the
place of Bina of the Eser Sefirot de Sium.
The place of the Sium of the Kav in Tzimtzum Aleph de Ein Sof was in
Malchut of the Eser Sefirot de Sium, which is the actual Olam ha Zeh,
as it says “And His feet shall stand upon the mount of Olives.”
Similarly, the same occurs now in Tzimtzum Bet, called Tzimtzum
NHY de AK, the point of Sium in the Bina of these Eser Sefirot, called
point of Olam ha Ba.
A Parsa was placed here, ending the new Gevul set up in the Olamot,
where the Raglaim of Partzuf SAG de AK end, and Parsa is regarded
as the Tzipornaim of the Raglaim de SAG de AK.
It has been explained (Ohr Pnimi item 21) that the Parsa and Shibolet
ha Zakan are one matter. That is why the Rav writes here that from
Yesod de AK “only two Havalim come out, opposite the Hotem and
Peh,” from which AVI received, and the Hevel opposite the Ohr
Awzen is absent. This is why the ZAT took from the Tzipornaim of the
Raglaim, since they took for the Sium of the Shibolet, ending the Ohr
de Awzen.
Understand, that because of the new point of Sium, three Behinot Sium
emerged in SAG, in its Rosh, Toch, Sof: the point of Sium of the Rosh,
is called Nikvey Eynaim, the point of Sium of the Toch, being in the
place of the previous Tabur, is called Shibolet ha Zakan, and the

--- PAGE 285 ---
Behinat Sium of the Sof, is called Parsa. Thus, the Parsa is the
Behinat Etzbaot Raglaim of SAG de AK.
However, everything we discern in SAG doesn’t change Partzuf SAG
itself in any way, as you already know that there is no absence and
change in the spiritual. Everything we discern in it is but a general
Behinat Shoresh (see Ohr Pnimi item 2).
However, all these changes that occur by the force of the new point of
Tzimtzum is only in that same new Partzuf that emerged because of
the connection of Behina Dalet with Behina Bet through the Nikvey
Eynaim, called Partzuf Nekudim. Also, only in the Rosh, Toch, Sof of
that Partzuf did the three Parsas emerge and were made in its RTS de
facto, and remember that.
You already know that there is a great Tikun in this Parsa that “draws
from above, and gives below,” because it is Behinat double Masach
from two Behinot: Behina Bet and Behina Dalet together. This is done
by the ascent of NHY to HGT, and the mingling of Behina Bet that
operates in the HGT of Partzuf SAG with Behina Dalet that operates
in NHY of the Inner AK.
Hence, the Parsa stands diagonally from Chazeh to Tabur, as it
contains within it NHY and HGT together. Thus, during the Gadlut,
the lower Hey, being Behina Dalet, descends from the Parsa and the
Parsa is split. In other words, the ending Gevul is canceled and the
Orot de SAG pass below the Parsa.
Afterwards, the Parsa immediately returns to its place, and in that
manner it draws He’arat SAG from above, and gives below, to Partzuf
Nekudim below the Tabur. It is similar in the Partzufim of Atzilut as
well.
The above seven lower Sefirot of Nekudim could not receive any Ohr
from the SAG because of the Sium of the Parsa. However, now, during
the Gadlut, after the Parsa has been fissured, they too are found to be
receiving Ohr from the place of the Parsa, the place of Behinat SAG
and HGT of the general AK.

--- PAGE 286 ---
Thus, the same Orot that the seven lower Sefirot de Nekudim received
from the Parsa is Behinat HGT, being the arms of the hands. That is
why it says, “and the arms of his hands were made supple.”
We find that before the Zivug de Gadlut, Parsa is considered the
Etzbaot Raglaim of Partzuf SAG. This is so because He’arat SAG
ends there and the Sof of the He’arah is called Raglaim. However,
when the Parsa fissures, at which time the Gevul returns to the point
of Sium de Olam ha Zeh as before, the Behinat HGT expands as
before.
29. The fitting Havalim for these seven Melachim came out through
the Tzipornaim of the Raglaim. Although the Tzipornaim are ten,
and the Nekudot that broke are only ZAT, the thing is that there
are also two kinds of Achoraim de Ima that broke, being the nine
Behinot, and the tenth.
This is so because in Keter too there was some flaw, and it is its
Behinat NHY that came inside as Mochin to AVI, and they too
broke. Thus, there are ten Behinot, for ten Havalim that came out
of the Tzimtzum of his Raglaim.
The discriminations of the exit of these ten Havalim through his
Tzipornaim were all the absence of their reception from the Ohr of
the Upper Awzen. Hence it is this reason that caused the
annulment of the Melachim.
30. Regarding the Akudim, the Behinat Taamim Nekudot, Tagin, Otiot
in them has already been explained above. Here we shall explain
them in the Behinat Nekudim.
It is written that Behinat Nekudim are the first Orot that came out
in the beginning, and the Otiot are the Kelim. Then, when the
Kelim broke and were separated each from its dead, the Orot
remained as Tagin on the Otiot, which are the Kelim. The Taamim
is the new name MA, that later came out from the Ohr of the
Metzach for the Tikun of the Melachim.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 287 ---
30. Regarding the Akudim, the Behinat TNTO in them has already
been explained above.
It is written (Part 4, Chap 3, item 11) that Hitpashtut Aleph of the
Partzuf, which is Ohr Yashar, Rachamim, is considered the Taamim in
it. When it begins to diminish by the power of the Hizdakchut of the
Masach, at which time the other four Komot of Katnut from Hochma
to Malchut emerge, they are considered Behinat Nekudot in it. Also,
The Reshimot that remain from the Behinat Nekudot, from the Behinot
Nitzotzin that fall off them into the Kelim are called Otiot.
Nekudim are the first Orot that came out in the beginning.
By that he tells us that the order is changed here, compared to the way
it was in the previous three Partzufim of AK. There the Gadlut came
out first, which are the Taamim, and then the degrees of Katnut
emerged, meaning the Nekudot.
However, here in Olam ha Nekudim, the Katnut came out first, and
then the Gadlut. This is so because at first, only the GAR came out, in
Orot de Ruach Nefesh, namely Komat ZA. Then AB and SAG mated,
the Parsa fissured, and the Orot de GAR went down to the Nekudim,
and to the seven lower Sefirot.
It is written, “Nekudot are the first Orot that came out in the
beginning,” meaning the opposite of the previous Partzufim Galgalta,
AB, SAG, where the Taamim came out first. Here the Behinot Nekudot
came out first, meaning the Katnut, and then the Gadlut.
Notwithstanding, He’arat Gadlut is not called Taamim, because they
were not in Behinat Rachamim, as in these Orot and in what caused
them was the matter of the breaking of the vessels.
And the Otiot are the Kelim.
They also contain the Nitzotzin that fell into them during the Histalkut
of the Orot from them, as it was in Akudim.
The Taamim is the new name MA.
Those Taamim that emerged in Olam ha Nekudim, meaning the Gadlut
that emerged by Zivug AB SAG, being the Taamim de Nekudim, did

--- PAGE 288 ---
not exist in Nekudim, but only after the new Taamim de MA corrected
them. Hence, they are called after the name of the MA.
31. *We shall repeat that we have explained that the Nekudot were
divided into three parts: The Elyonim above the Otiot, such as the
Holam, in the middle, like the Shuruk, and the Tachtonim like the
rest of the Nekudot.
The Nekuda of the Holam is the Hevel that exits from Tabur,
where the Keter stands. This is because Keter is the Holam on the
Tifferet, as Holam is mainly in Tifferet de AK.
However, Keter became Nekudot, as it says in the fifth Tikun, that
Holam is Keter in the Otiot. The Nikud (punctuation) of Shuruk in
the Vav, called Melafom, being in the middle, is the Hevel
emerging from Yesod to AVI.
It is divided into two because that Nekuda of Shuruk is Vav, the
Yod in the middle, and the Yod of Shuruk is for Abba, called the
first Yod of the Name. Also, the Vav of Shuruk is for Ima, to
produce and generate the VAK de ZA. This is the Behinat Vav that
Ima takes.
There is yet another reason that the Nekuda, which is like a Yod in
the Shuruk, is higher, and Abba de Nekudim sucks from it. It is
known, that the Vav of the Shuruk, being the letter Vav, Ima de
Nekudim sucks from that. This is because the Nekudot of Hochma,
the Otiot Bina, and the seven lower Nekudot with the three
Behinot, are: one - NHY of Keter, and two - Achoraim de AVI.
Thus, these ten came out through the Tzipornaim of the Raglaim.
We do not mean to say that these are the Nekudot themselves, only
that Ohr came out of all these Havalim to the ten Nekudot that
came out through the Ayin, and remember that.
Ohr Pnimi
31. The Nekudot were divided into three parts:
By the three Orot Bina, ZA and Malchut that shine in Nekudim (see
Ohr Pnimi item 23). This is so because there is Ohr Bina there from

--- PAGE 289 ---
Behinat Hitlabshut called Zachar, being Keter de Nekudim. There is
also Koma de Behina Aleph there, being the Nekeva de Nekudim,
called Hochma and Bina, where Ohr ZA is in Hochma and Ohr
Malchut in Bina.
It is written that the Nekudot are divided into three parts Bina, ZA and
Malchut, clothed in Keter, Hochma and Bina of the Nekudot.
However, know that ZA and Malchut found in Hochma and Bina are
both considered as one part, since they are Behinat Ohr of one Koma,
Koma de Behina Aleph.
For that reason the seven lower Sefirot are considered the third part. In
this way, that Keter that has Bina from Behinat Hitlabshut, is the
upper part, and Hochma and Bina together are the second part, while
the ZAT are the third part.
The Holam is the Hevel that exits from Tabur, where the Keter
stands.
It is Ohr Bina from Behinat Hitlabshut. It’s been explained above
(Ohr Pnimi item 23) that no Hitpashtut Kelim came out of this Zivug
of Behina Bet de Hitlabshut, but from a Masach that has Behinat
Hamshacha. Hence, the Kelim only came out from Behina Aleph of
the Nekeva, being Hochma and Bina.
This is why it is written that the Hevel comes out of the Tabur to the
Keter of Nekudim. This Hevel is the Ohr Bina (item 27), Behinat
Holam above the Otiot (see item 17). This is so because the Otiot are
the Kelim and this Ohr Bina that only came out from Behina Bet de
Hitlabshut has no Hitpashtut for Kelim. Consequently, it is Behinat
Holam above the Otiot and does not touch them, for it cannot clothe
within them.
Shuruk in the Vav, called Melafom, being in the middle.
It is written above that only AVI, which are the Nekeva de Nekudim,
have Hitpashtut Kelim and can clothe within them. Hence AVI are
implied in the Shuruk, meaning a Melafom in the middle of the Otiot.
Yod of Shuruk is for Abba, called the first Yod of the Name.

--- PAGE 290 ---
Meaning the Yod of the Name HaVaYaH, which is Behinat AB, being
Abba. He implies the Behinat five Hassadim of the Yesod that Abba
took. This is because it is known that the influence of Yesod is only the
Hassadim and Gevurot and Abba takes the five Hassadim, since AB is
Hassadim.
The Vav of Shuruk is for Ima, to produce and generate the VAK de
ZA.
Ima is the first Hey of the Name HaVaYaH. Hence she received the
Behinat “truncated Vav inside the Hey” from the Yesod, which is her
MAN and is the ZA in the intestines of Bina.
The Nekuda… …and Abba de Nekudim sucks from it.
Nekuda implies the lower Hey that rose to Nikvey Eynaim from which
came AVI de Nekudim. Now she became Behinat MAN for Abba for
the great Zivug of Histaklut Eynaim de AVI.
The Vav of the Shuruk, being the letter Vav, Ima de Nekudim sucks
from that.
It is as he wrote in the Tree of Life, that through the force of the
raising of MAN to Nikvey Eynaim, it splits the HaVaYaH de SAG there,
where the Vav in the Peh is Ima.
Nekudot of Hochma, the Otiot Bina.
Because AVI have only Komat ZA from the beginning of their
creation. Abba is considered Ohr ZA, and Ima the Kli, which is Otiot.
This Ohr in the Katnut is called Ohr Nekudot, as the Rav says in item
30 here. This is why it is written Nekudot – Hochma, and Otiot – Bina.
And the seven lower Nekudot… …these ten came out through the
Tzipornaim of the Raglaim.
It means that they are the Nekudot under the Otiot, which are the nine
Nekudot. In the first two Nekudot: Kamatz, Patach, there was no
breaking, as they are Keter and Hochma. In the seven lower Nekudot
there was a breaking of the vessels, as the Rav says in the Tree of Life.

--- PAGE 291 ---
These nine Nekudot are Tachtonim under the Otiot because they
received the Behinat Havalim coming out through the Tzipornaim of
the Raglaim, which are under the Kelim of the Partzuf.
We might ask: He says above that Holam and Shuruk are the Keter
and Hochma, meaning the Upper and Middle Nekudot. However, here
he considers them Kamatz and Patach. It turns out that Keter and
Hochma are also Lower Nekudot.
The thing is that we must distinguish in them the Etzem of their
emanation, as they first emerged through the Nikvey Eynaim, when
only two Orot came out of there, Zachar and Nekeva. The Keter was
the Zachar, reaching up to Bina, from the Behinat Hitlabshut, and the
Nekeva is both Hochma and Bina together, in the Koma of Behina
Aleph.
Hence they are considered Holam and Shuruk here, implying that the
Zachar, which is Keter, has no Hitpashtut for Kelim, and he is above
the Partzuf as a Nekuda of Tabur above Partzuf Nekudim, as Behinat
Holam. He is Keter to the Otiot and does not participate in the
Hitpashtut of the Partzuf. Opposite that the AVI are implied in the
Shuruk, inside the Otiot, meaning inside the Partzuf, as they are the
Behinat Nekeva, having complete MAN from Behinat Hamshacha too.
However, the Nekudot below the Otiot imply the time of Gadlut of the
Nekudim after the AB and SAG mated and the Koma that emerged by
their Zivug descended and fissured the Parsa. It means that the Gevul
of the Sium Raglin de SAG was canceled, and then the entire Partzuf
of Nekudim that stands under the Parsa received from the Raglaim de
SAG above the Parsa.
This means that the Eser Sefirot de Sium of the SAG that the Parsa
rides on now acquired Behinot Hitpashtut and illuminated for the
Nekudim. Thus, the Nekudim are now found to be receiving from the
Orot below the Partzuf in its previous form. These are called the
Nekudot under the Otiot.
Study that well for that Behinat Holam above the Otiot of Partzuf de
Nekudim during its creation descended from there during the Gadlut

--- PAGE 292 ---
and clothed in Nekudim, meaning inside the Otiot. We refer to them as
under the Otiot only compared to the state of the giver, not with
respect to the state of the receiver.
Thus we have learned that these Keter and Hochma too received from
Sium Raglin de SAG as the ZAT. Moreover, they are the prime
receivers, and they are the ones that gave them to the ZAT.
In that sense they are called Kamatz Patach, for they are under the
Otiot. Thus, in order to indicate the Behinat Keter and Hochma from
their very creation, they are marked with Holam and Shuruk.
Conversely, when indicated with respect to what they received by the
Gadlut de Nekudim, they are then called Kamatz Patach.
However, when the Rav writes that Kamatz Patach did not break, he
refers to what they have from their very creation, not to what they
received from Sium Raglin de SAG. This is because these He’arot
were canceled from both Keter and Hochma, and they are called Orot
Achoraim of AVI.
We do not mean to say that these are the Nekudot themselves.
It means that these Orot and Havalim that came out of the Tzipornaim
of his Raglaim are not the Atzmut of the Nekudot. Rather, they are
considered as mere additions, because the Behinat Atzmut of the
Nekudot came out of the Ohr Eynaim.
32. *In the beginning of my studies with my teacher, he would hide,
cover and clothe the matters, as I did not yet know the beginning
of things, as I have presented them in the previous gates. Hence,
when he began to explain to me the matter of Atik Yomin, he
explained one study, and we shall write it here.
I could not connect it with what I have written thus far, yet I do
wish to write it, and perhaps the reader will be able to connect it
with the above, for the matters seem to contradict the above. This
is its matter:
It is known that there were ten Nekudim first, where the first three
did not break, and the Kelim and the Orot remained, but the seven

--- PAGE 293 ---
lower Nekudot broke and the Kelim descended to Beria.
Consequently, the Orot remained in their place in Olam Atzilut
without any clothing.
Know, that the first three Nekudot, both in the Behinat Orot and in
the Behinat Kelim, are the only ones Partzuf Atik Yomin is made of.
No other force is involved in them.
However, there are many forces involved in the seven lower
Nekudot: there is an upper Behina from Behinat Atik in each of the
seven Nekudot, and there is a second Behina of AA in each of the
seven Nekudot as well. There is also Behinat AVI, and there is the
lowest amongst them, that of ZON.
Ohr Pnimi
32. The first three Nekudot… …are the only ones Partzuf Atik Yomin
is made of.
Meaning: Partzuf Keter, called Atik, has Eser Sefirot called Inner
HaVaYaH. The tip of the Yod is the Keter in it, meaning Keter de
Keter; the Yod in it is Abba and Hochma; the first Hey in it is Ima and
Bina, and the Vav in it is ZA. The last Hey in it is Malchut.
Complete HaVaYaH emerges as Malbush out of every single Ot in the
Inner HaVaYaH in Partzuf Keter itself. Partzuf AB comes out of its
Yod, and Partzuf SAG comes out of its first Hey. AB is called Abba
and the SAG is called Ima. Partzuf ZA comes out of the Vav in it,
clothing it from Tabur down, and Partzuf Malchut comes out of the
last Hey.
Know, that so it is in every complete Partzuf. Partzuf Keter is
considered the Pnimi, also containing inner AB, SAG, MA, BON,
called Inner HaVaYaH. Besides those, it has Outer AB, SAG, MA,
BON, which are Malbushim to it. The AB and SAG clothe above
Tabur, and MA and BON, being ZON, clothe below Tabur, as the Rav
says (Part 6, item 1).
Thus, in Partzuf Nekudim only Behinat Partzuf Keter in it came out
with the AB, SAG, MA, BON in its Pnimiut. It did not have time to

--- PAGE 294 ---
produce the outer AB, SAG, MA, BON, because the seven lower Sefirot
in it broke, and the Achoraim of the GAR in it were also canceled.
However, the Behinat Panim of its First Three remained. It means that
everything that was in these GAR from the beginning of their creation
is called Panim; all of it remained and not a thing of them was
canceled.
It is written, “The first three Nekudot, both in the Behinat Orot and
in the Behinat Kelim, are the only ones Partzuf Atik Yomin is made
of.” It is so because the outer AB, SAG, MA, BON have no hold on the
GAR de Partzuf Keter.
This is the meaning of the words, “no other force is involved in
them.” This is because even Partzuf AB begins to emerge from Peh de
Partzuf Keter downward, which is below Malchut of its Rosh; much
less in the rest of the Partzufim.
There are many forces involved in the seven lower Nekudot.
It refers to those Behinot from which the four Partzufim outer ASMB
that clothe it should emerge. It is so because they haven’t emerged
from it in Olam ha Nekudim. He will explain henceforth that there is
Behinat AA that should come out of it.
33. It turns out that the Partzufim AA, AVI and ZON after the Tikun,
came out of these Behinot in the seven lower Nekudot, both from
the Behinat Orot, and from the Behinat Kelim. Indeed, those
Behinot that have the Atik Yomin in them rose and mingled with
the first three Nekudot, all of which are Behinat Atik Yomin, and
Partzuf Atik was made of all these Behinot as we’ve explained.
Ohr Pnimi
33. The Partzufim AA, AVI and ZON after the Tikun, came out of
these Behinot in the seven lower Nekudot.
Meaning by the selections in the association of the new MA with
them. Even Partzuf AA was made of Behinat NHY de Keter that was
sorted and corrected through the new MA because of the annulment of
the Achoraim that were there during the breaking of the vessels.

--- PAGE 295 ---
Know, that these NHY de Keter from which AA de Atzilut was made is
considered the seven lower Sefirot de Keter. The rule is that any thing
that was in Partzuf Nekudim from the beginning of creation, meaning
as it came out of the Nikvey Eynaim, is considered GAR.
This is because Ohr Eynaim illuminated only to the GAR de Nekudim
in the beginning of its creation. Nevertheless, only Behinat Rosh
without a Guf came out of the Ohr Eynaim, for Behina Aleph doesn’t
shine to the Guf, as the Rav says (Part 3, Chap 1, item 6). Hence, all
that the ZAT de Nekudim had was He’arat Kelim from Behinat
Histaklut Eynaim in AHP.
Now you can see that the entire Behinat Gadlut that reached them as
addition to what they had from the beginning of their creation is
considered Behinat ZAT and Kelim de Achoraim. This is because they
took them from the Behinat Tzipornaim of the Raglaim de SAG.
34. It is known that the Elyon expands in any Tachton to sustain it,
but the Tachton does not expand in its Elyon. Hence there is the
force of Atik Yomin in the seven lower Nekudot, but no force of AA,
AVI and ZON is involved in the first three Nekudot, as they are all
Behinat Atik.
35. *However, the Upper Maatzil wanted to create that Behinat
Melachim in that manner to begin with, consisting of Behinat
Kedusha, but she is Dinim and Gevurot and the Shmarim and the
Klipot are mixed in them. He created them like that deliberately so
that there would be reward and punishment in the world, to
punish the wicked and reward the righteous.
This is not the place to elaborate, but He created them like that
deliberately, in order to abolish and exterminate them. Thus the
holy Nitzotzot would be sorted out from among them, rise up, and
the Klipot mixed in them would remain below, as Sigim of gold
and Shmarim of wine.
36. Know, that these seven Melachim are ten, but they are like the
seven Heichalot, which are ten that are called seven. It is so

--- PAGE 296 ---
because the top Heichal contains the first three Heichalot, and the
bottom Heichal contains the last two Heichalot.
It is exactly the same in these seven Melachim, for they are ten,
but are called only seven. Since these Melachim are Behinot Dinim
and Gevurot, you find that they are all in the form of Nekeva, as
the Nekeva is all Din.
37. *He wrote, “Come and see the very beginning of faith etc.”
“trampled over the black Nitzotz,” which is the Shoresh of the Din,
“concealed in the intestine of Ima,” as mentioned in the Zohar
(Idra Zuta), “and threw Nitzotzin in 320 directions.”
Since these Melachim are Dinim and strong Gevurot, they are
called Nitzotzin of Esh that came out of the Butzina de Kardinuta
(Candle of Darkness). They numbered 320 Nitzotzin, each Nitzotz
separated from the other, and they each turned their own way.
They were thrown until they went below Olam Atzilut, and being
there, they sorted out the offal from within the thought.
It turns out that since they are hard Dinim the offal of the Klipa
was mixed with them, and when they were thrown down, they
were sorted and corrected. The good and the holy among them
returned to be corrected by the eighth Melech, called Hadar, rose
up, and the offal in them became the Behinot Klipot and they
remained below.
38. *Indeed these ten Nekudot were one atop the other. The measure
of their Koma was as the current measure and Koma of Atzilut,
this is because the place where those Nekudot reached, until that
place it is now Olam Atzilut, and from there down, Olam Beria.
Ohr Pnimi
38. Ten Nekudot were one atop the other.
He is uneasy with interpreting the ten Nekudot he mentions here.
Though only the seven lower Nekudot were one above the other, only
the first three among them were in Tikun Kavim, as it is known in all
the places.

--- PAGE 297 ---
The reason the seven lower Nekudot were in one Kav one below the
other is that the matter of the Tikun Kavim came out by the ascent of
NHY to HGT, where Behina Bet and Behina Dalet were mixed
together (Ohr Pnimi item 1). This is because then Malchut was
incorporated in every single Sefira through Hochma.
Consequently, a Kav of Hesed and a Kav of Din were created in every
single Sefira. Thus, through the Zivug that raises Ohr Hozer they were
united with each other as Rachamim.
The beginning of this Tikun was made in Partzuf Nekudim that came
out of Nikvey Eynaim de SAG, though this Ohr reached only GAR of
Nekudim, and not the lower seven. Hence, the seven lower Kelim
remained without Tikun Kavim.
You should know here that the Kelim of every Partzuf were made of
the same Kelim in the Partzuf above it after the Histalkut of their Orot
from within them. Now you can see that the Kli of the Eser Sefirot de
Nekudim was made of the lower nine Sefirot de SAG, which extended
below Tabur, and the Ohr departed from them during Tzimtzum NHY
de AK.
Hence, since there was still no Tikun Kavim in SAG, the seven lower
Kelim came out in one Kav. However, the GAR that received from the
Zivug in Nikvey Eynaim came out in Tikun Kavim. Even though the
seven lower Kelim took from the Histaklut Eynaim in AHP as well,
this minute He’arah is insufficient for them for Tikun Kavim.
The measure of their Koma was as the current measure and Koma
of Atzilut.
The new point of Tzimtzum in the Olamot was made of the association
of Behina Dalet and Behina Bet and mixing them together, in the
place of Behina Bet of the Eser Sefirot de Sium. The first Partzuf to
come out in the new measure of Sium is Partzuf Nekudim, and all
other Partzufim of Atzilut follow it.
That place from the old point of Tzimtzum, being Olam ha Zeh, and
the new point of Tzimtzum, is called the place of the three Olamot,

--- PAGE 298 ---
BYA. Since they stand in that place after the new point of Tzimtzum
that’s been renewed, these three Olamot are called the three Olamot of
separation. That is why it is said that the Koma of Nekudim and the
Koma of Olam Atzilut have the same length, and from there down,
Olam ha Beria.
39. However, the Ohr of these ten Nekudim was great indeed. Also, the
Ohr Elyon was added to them, and they did not have the strength
to receive. It is then that these Kelim died, meaning went below, to
the place that is now Beria, and this descent was their death.
Indeed, this is only in the seven lower Nekudot, because the GAR
had power in their Kelim to receive their Ohr, and they did not
die. However, the seven Kelim of the lower seven are the ones that
died and descended to the place that is now Beria, and this is their
death.
Indeed, the time of their death was when they emerged as
Nekudim. It is so because when they came out of Akudim, where
they were mixed in the Keter together, from which they came out
and divided into Yod Nekudim. Then they came out and died
instantaneously, as it is written in the Zohar, “The craftsman
crushes the iron and Nitzotzin come out, and quench
instantaneously.”
Ohr Pnimi
39. Also, the Ohr Elyon was added to them.
Besides what they had in the beginning of their creation, from Zivug
Nikvey Eynaim, another Partzuf came to them, complete in Gadlut, by
the Zivug de AB SAG, where the first Ohr is called the “essence” of
their emanation.
And they didn’t have the strength to receive.
The Kelim were too small to contain the great Ohr that came as an
addition because that Ohr was in Behinat GAR, and their Kelim began
from Bina down (Ohr Pnimi item 26). Hence, they did not exist until

--- PAGE 299 ---
the new MA came and connected them with it; then the Kelim grew
and existed.
GAR had power in their Kelim to receive their Ohr.
Meaning precisely their own Ohr, which they had in the beginning of
their creation, meaning the above first Ohr. However, the second Ohr,
called “additions” did not exist in GAR too, meaning the annulment of
Achoraim de AVI and the blemish of NHY de Keter that the Rav
introduces.
When they came out of Akudim… …and divided into Yod
Nekudim. Then they came out and died instantaneously.
In the beginning, all the Orot came and mingled in Kli de Keter de
Nekudim. This is still considered Akudim, meaning Behinat Partzuf
SAG, because it has Behina Bet de Hitlabshut (Ohr Pnimi item 23).
There are the Atzmut Ohr Awzen in it, though afterwards, by the
He’arat Yesod de AK, NHY of this Keter expanded into AVI, and AVI
returned to be Panim be Panim (face to face).
They mated on the MAN of the lower Hey as a Nekuda that Abba took
and the great Zivug was made as Histaklut Eynaim de AVI in each
other. This great Ohr expanded from above downward to the Kelim de
Nekudim, meaning to divide into ten Nekudim. Because each and
every Kli consisted of Yod, as it is known regarding the 320 Nitzotzin,
they instantly broke and died.
It is written, “The craftsman crushes the iron and Nitzotzin come
out, and quench instantaneously.” They are 320 sparks, because
each Melech consists of four Behinot HB TM. Each Behina contained
ten Nekudot, thus forty sparks for every Melech. Since they are eight
Melachim, thus eight times forty is 320, and this is the meaning of the
320 Nitzotzin mentioned in all the places.
40. *In the beginning the ten were simple Atzmut, consisting of Yod,
indiscernible in them. The GAR, which were Rachamim, could
receive the Ohr Ein Sof, and when it reached the seven Nekudot,
they would be canceled.

--- PAGE 300 ---
Also, these are the Melachim that died. Since they are Din, while
the Ohr that comes is Rachamim, they could not receive it, and
since they did not receive the sustenance, they died. Hence it was
necessary to correct where Kelim would be made for the Keter.
Thus the Ohr that comes and passes through the Masach was
corrected and even these Yod became apparent in it.
These Melachim are below Malchut de Atzilut, and only Hadar was
left of them, since they were Dechar and Nukva, and they are
Tifferet and Malchut.
Ohr Pnimi
40. The ten were simple Atzmut, consisting of Yod, indiscernible in
them.
It means that they are GAR de Nekudim, even though Tikun Kavim and
Behinat Yod Kavim were already in them. This means that Malchut
incorporated in each and every Sefira and the ten Kelim became Orot.
However, since they are Behinat Rosh, and the Masach operates in
them from below upward, all the Orot are therefore still considered to
be contained in Kli de Keter, as in Akudim. Also, the matter of the Yod
Kelim is indiscernible in them, because the Behinat Aviut is
unapparent from below upward, meaning before the Ohr clothes in the
Kelim.
The GAR, which were Rachamim, could receive the Ohr Ein Sof.
As it says in the previous item, the Behinat Aviut, which is Midat ha
Din from the Hitkalelut Malchut in each and every Sefira, is not
apparent in the GAR just yet. This is because there is no actual Behinat
Hitlabshut in them, but only in potential, hence they are Rachamim.
Since they are Din, while the Ohr that comes is Rachamim, they
could not receive it.
It’s been written above that the Kelim were small, because the great
Kelim in the Gufim of the three previous Partzufim of AK, being Kli de
Keter and Kli de Hochma, were absent here in the Guf of Nekudim.

--- PAGE 301 ---
This is because they began from Sefirat Daat down, being Kli de Bina
(see Ohr Pnimi item 26).
The Ohr that came to them was Rachamim, meaning Orot of GAR,
called Ohr of Rachamim, they need to clothe in the Zach Kelim of
Keter and Hochma. This is the reason they could not receive it.
Kelim would be made for the Keter. Thus the Ohr that comes and
passes through the Masach.
He refers to the Masach de Yesod de Atik that was corrected in Atzilut,
by which the Ohr was corrected, as written above.
These Yod became apparent in it.
It is so because they were corrected in Tikun Kavim and Yod Kelim in
the ZAT too through the Ibur and Yenika, and then the Atzmut clothed
in the Kelim.
Below Malchut de Atzilut.
Meaning they expanded below Parsa de Atzilut and came out of the
Gevul of the new point of Tzimtzum that was in Nekudim, and this was
their death.
Since they were Dechar and Nukva.
Meaning his Nukva was corrected, as she should have been; therefore
he remained. This is the meaning of the name New MA, which will be
explained in its place.
41. *Each of these ten Sefirot certainly consisted of all the ten Sefirot,
but that was by way of admixture. [Let us make an allegory such
as this: it is as if water and wine, oil, honey and milk were all
mixed together in the same pot.]
The lower seven were in Behinat Dinim because it is impossible for
the world to exist and be conducted except through the Dinim and
the Klipot, as it is written in the Mishna, to punish the wicked and
reward the righteous, etc.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 302 ---
41. Consisted of all the Eser Sefirot, but that was by way of
admixture.
This means that the Tikun of the ten Kelim was made by Tzimtzum
NHY. It means that Behina Dalet incorporated in each and every
Sefira because of her connection with Behina Bet, and the Masach and
Zivug were corrected in each and every Sefira through Hochma and
through the Nikvey Eynaim.
However, that Tikun was only on the GAR de Nekudim. The
connection of Behina Bet with Behina Dalet dominated in the ZAT de
Nekudim, as these Kelim are Behinat Kelim of the lower nine Sefirot
de SAG. That connection was primarily in them, and there the Behina
Bet became AB, by the force of their He’arah in the inner ZON de AK
(see Ohr Pnimi item 1).
Hence the ZAT received that doubled Behinat Aviut first, but it was in
them without a Tikun. Instead, they were mixed together in one
another like the mixture of moist with moist that the Rav brings. It
means that the Behinot Dinim themselves and Behinot Rachamim
themselves were not apparent, but everything was mixed together
beyond recognition. Also, from this mixture formed the Behinot
Klipot, as Sigim of gold and Shmarim of wine, and they too mixed
with those Kelim beyond recognition.
You must perceive in this matter that although the Behinat Aviut in the
Kelim is their entire magnitude and merit, the height of their Koma is
measured by it. Indeed, this is provided they have a Tikun of the
Masach equivalent to that measure of Aviut.
However, if they do not have that Tikun of the Masach that should be
with respect to that Aviut, the Aviut turns into hard and bitter Dinim,
since Shinui Tzura is separation in the spiritual. For that reason they
cannot suck their sustenance off the Ohr Elyon, for then the Aviut
turns into Behinot Dinim and Klipot, meaning to incorrigible nocuous,
until they receive their complete Tikun.
It is impossible for the world to exist and be conducted except
through the Dinim and the Klipot.

--- PAGE 303 ---
Since the world is conducted according to the thought of creation,
which is to delight His creatures, meaning give a good reward to the
righteous. Such a leadership cannot exist except by the work in the
form of “God hath made even the one as well as the other,” hence, the
place was prepared for the existence of the Dinim and Klipot.
42. However, the Din was below in the lower seven, but everything
was mixed together. Because of that there wasn’t any correction in
the Yod Sefirot at all. Hence, when Ohr Ein Sof descended and
fissured in them from above downward the Ohr descended from
Keter to Hochma and from Hochma to Bina, which is the third
Sefira.
However, when that Ohr Elyon expanded, being complete
Rachamim and complete Hesed, and when it reached the lower
seven, being Dinim, and Dinim are awakened by them, they could
not receive it. This is because they are opposites, one is Hesed and
one is Din, and they were canceled by the Ohr Elyon and died, as it
says, “And Bela died, And Husham died” etc.
Ohr Pnimi
42. Ohr Ein Sof descended and fissured in them from above
downward.
This refers to the new Ohr that came down and fissured the Parsa and
the Ohr for Nekudim, as the Rav says. Also, fissuring means the
annulment of the Gevul.
43. Then these seven lower Melachim descended below in Olam Beria,
completely under the place of Malchut de Atzilut. Their place
under Sefirat Bina remained vacant, and in that space between
Sefirat Bina and these seven Melachim another seven Sefirot
emerged, mingled together in the image of Adam, consisting of
Zachar and Nekeva.
This is ZON, called the eighth Melech, whose name is Hadar, and
the name of his wife, Mehetabel. This is because Hadar is ZA and
Mehetabel is Nukva.

--- PAGE 304 ---
Ohr Pnimi
43. Completely under the place of Malchut de Atzilut.
Under the place of the new Tzimtzum where Behinat Atzilut ends and
the place of the Separated Olamot begins.
Their place under Sefirat Bina remained vacant.
This is so because the GAR, which are KHB, remained, and only the
Melachim from Bina down broke and left a vacant space. After the
Tikun, that will be the place where Olam Atzilut will stand.
44. *Thus, when you count the Name from AB, each Behinat AB will
be Yod from HaVaYaH, and SAG, the first Hey of HaVaYaH, MA is
the Ot Vav, and BON is the last Ot Hey. When we count the Name
only from Behinat SAG, the Taamim of SAG will be the Ot Yod, the
Nekudot, the first Ot Hey, the Tagin Ot Vav, and the Otiot the last
Hey.
When we divide the Taamim too, the Ot Yod will be in the Awzen,
the first Ot Hey in the Hotem, Ot Vav in the Peh, and the last Ot
Hey in the Eynaim. This is because the Ayin has Behinat last Hey
and first Hey.
Ohr Pnimi
44. When you count the Name from AB… …When we count the
Name only from Behinat SAG.
You must know that the Taamim, Nekudot, Tagin, Otiot relate to the
four-letter Name differently than the Eser Sefirot or the five Partzufim
in the four-letter Name. It is so because in the Eser Sefirot the tip of
the Yod is regarded as the Keter, the Yod, Hochma and the Hey, Bina.
The Vav is considered ZA and the last Hey is ascribed to Malchut.
However, in the TNTO, the Yod is considered Taamim and Keter, the
first Hey Nekudot and Hochma, the Vav Tagin and Bina, and the lower
Hey Otiot and ZON.
The reason for it is that the four degrees of TNTO are but four
denominations appearing in the order of the Histalkut of the Orot of

--- PAGE 305 ---
the Partzufim prior to the Tikun. As the Rav writes above (item 9), the
first Hitpashtut of Malchut de Rosh to the Guf is called Taamim, since
it is Ohr Yashar, Rachamim.
That Kli is called Keter because the beginning of the coming of the
Orot to the Guf is always in Kli de Keter. It is called Yod of HaVaYaH
since it is the beginning of the Hitlabshut of the Guf and the Kelim,
and it is therefore ascribed to the Yod, being the beginning of the
HaVaYaH.
When the Masach in Kli de Keter purifies and the Koma gradually
diminishes on the four Behinot until it disappears entirely from the
Maatzil, all these Komot are named Nekudot. This is so because they
are created during the Histalkut of the Orot to the Maatzil, and they
are therefore considered Ohr Hozer and Din.
Also, they are called Hochma because the Upper Sefira in them is
Hochma and the three Komot Bina, ZA and Malchut are incorporated
in the Upper One. They are also called the first Hey of HaVaYaH since
they are Behinat Din and Behinat Din is always considered Nukva,
which is Hey de HaVaYaH.
In the Reshimot remaining after the Histalkut Ohr, the Taamim are
called Tagin, since they overlie the Kelim during the Histalkut of their
Orot like Tagin over the Otiot. They are called Bina because they
come from Behinat Ohr Yashar and Rachamim and are Behinat GAR.
However, since they are in Behinat Histalkut, they are considered
Bina, which is Behinat Nukva de GAR.
After their Histalkut from the Ohr Nekudot, the Reshimot are called
Otiot, meaning Behinat Kelim. This is because they come from Ohr
Hozer and Din, and also because they are from Behinat Histalkut. For
that reason they are also called Kelim. They are also considered
Behinat ZON since the Ohr of ZON, which are VAK, is Behinat Ohr
Kelim.
You find that both the Reshimot de Taamim, called Tagin and Bina,
and the Reshimot de Nekudot, called Otiot, are Behinat Histalkut and

--- PAGE 306 ---
Achoraim. However, since the Reshimo de Taamim is Behinat GAR, it
is therefore called Bina. It is also Behinat Vav de HaVaYaH, meaning
Vav in the Rosh. Conversely, since Reshimot de Nekudot are Behinot
VAK, they are called ZON and Otiot and are Behinat last Hey de
HaVaYaH.
Here the Rav means to show the state and the degree of the position of
Partzuf Nekudim between the Partzufim of AK as well as the order of
its concatenation from them and its connection with them. Hence, he
first arranged for us the five Partzufim according to the four-letter
Name, and says that AB which is Partzuf Hochma de AK, is Partzuf
Yod de HaVaYaH, and the SAG, which is Partzuf Bina de AK, is Hey
de HaVaYaH.
After we know that the SAG is Behinat Hey de HaVaYaH, he
elaborates on the SAG itself, regarding its TNTO, whose order is
different than the order of the five Partzufim, though they are closely
related, as we’ve explained above.
When we divide the Taamim too.
This division is done after the ascent of the Orot from NHY de AK to
MAN to the Taamim de SAG and to Behinat Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh of
the Taamim (see item 14). This caused the division of the Eser Sefirot
de Rosh SAG to two Behinot on the Nikvey Eynaim because of the
Masach and the place of the Zivug that rose there.
Hence, from Nikvey Eynaim up it became a Rosh, and from Nikvey
Eynaim down it became the Guf. The Awzen, Hotem and Peh there,
are found to have departed from the degree of Rosh into the degree of
Guf.
Ot Yod will be in the Awzen, the first Ot Hey in the Hotem, Ot Vav
in the Peh, and the last Ot Hey in the Eynaim.
As has been explained above, all this was caused by the ascent of Orot
NHY de AK to the Nikvey Eynaim. It is so because then the Nekudot de
SAG, being the four Komot Hochma, Bina, ZA and Malchut emerging
out of SAG after the Hizdakchut of the Masach of Keter de Guf de

--- PAGE 307 ---
SAG, called Taamim, expanded below Tabur of the Inner AK, where
they illuminated to the Inner ZON there.
Two kinds of Orot are found there, Nekudot de SAG, and the Inner
ZON, mixed with each other. Behinat SAG is Behina Bet and the first
Hey de HaVaYaH, and Behinat Inner ZON are Behina Dalet and the
lower Hey de HaVaYaH (see Ohr Pnimi item 6). There it explains the
reason for the ascent of the two Heys to MAN to Nikvey Eynaim and
the matter of their division into two degrees.
It is written that the last Hey rose to Nikvey Eynaim, meaning through
its association with the first Hey. In other words, the AHP went
outside the Rosh, as these AHP are Yod Hey Vav, considered Behinat
Rosh Tachton containing Eser complete Sefirot, except the last Hey,
which is absent there because she remained in the Nikvey Eynaim.
It is written, YHV (Yod Hey Vav) in the AHP and the last Hey in the
Eynaim. It is so because now the Rosh of the Taamim has been divided
into two Roshim. The last Hey remained in the first Rosh, which is
Galgalta ve Eynaim, and the second Rosh contains not more than
YHV. The YH are KHB, Vav is HGT NHY, and Malchut, which is the
lower Hey, is absent in the second Rosh.
In order to understand these above-mentioned two Roshim, we have to
study them from Partzuf Nekudim that emerged through that Zivug de
Nikvey Eynaim. This is because in this place, where the Zivug was
formed, which is the Rosh de SAG, it did not change by the division
made on Nikvey Eynaim (see Ohr Pnimi item 2).
Instead, only that Koma, which came out of this Zivug de Nikvey
Eynaim, accepted all those changes branching from the ascent of the
lower Hey to Nikvey Eynaim. This Koma that emerged from there is
called Olam ha Nekudim.
You should know that three Roshim must be discerned in that Olam de
Nekudim, and three Roshim are merely Eser Sefirot of a single Rosh,
relating to what they were prior to the ascent of MAN to the Nikvey
Eynaim. You should remember the order of the ascents of the Orot to

--- PAGE 308 ---
the second Zivug in the Rosh de Elyon, from which the Tachton was
born.
They are considered Zachar and Nekeva since they first make two
Zivugim in the Rosh of the Elyon, they mingle in one another, and
from there descend and expand to their own place in their related Guf
de Elyon. There they expand once more to Rosh and Guf (see Part 3,
Chap 4, item 50, and Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 6).
It turns out that after the Reshimot of Nekudim de SAG rose along with
the lower Hey to Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh SAG, and were mingled
there in the two Zivugim, they returned to their place, the Tabur de AK.
There they expanded in Rosh and Guf as the image of the Zivugim
they made in the Rosh, meaning in the place of Nikvey Eynaim.
It has already been explained that the Masach de Nikvey Eynaim
stands at the Tabur (see Ohr Pnimi item 9), meaning in the place of
the Parsa that’s been erected there. Thus, it turns out that the Rosh of
this Partzuf came out from the Tabur up to Chazeh de SAG, having
only the two Sefirot Galgalta and Eynaim, and the lower Hey is in
these Nikvey Eynaim.
This is the first Rosh in Partzuf Nekudim, considered to have the value
of RADLA de Atzilut, as it does not join Partzuf Nekudim at all, but is
Behinat Shoresh Elyon to the Partzuf of Nikvey Eynaim (see Ohr
Pnimi item 20).
The three Sefirot de Rosh: Awzen, Hotem, Peh, which came out of the
degree of the first Rosh, consist of two Roshim, since they are below
its Masach. It is so because they are considered the three Sefirot AHP
compared to what is missing from the first Rosh, called YESHSUT.
However, they do have Eser complete Sefirot in themselves, GE and
AHP.
They are called GAR de Nekudim, standing from Tabur de AK down,
and they are the actual Nekudim where these two Zivugim de Katnut
and Gadlut occur. In Katnut, the lower Hey is in the Eynaim of that
Rosh, and the three Sefirot AHP are considered the lower Rosh and

--- PAGE 309 ---
Behinat HGT compared to the Elyon, which is the second Rosh, as it is
below its Nikvey Eynaim.
In Gadlut, the lower Hey descends to the Peh, meaning to Malchut
that contains all three Roshim. Then the GE, being the second Rosh,
join their AHP, which is the third Rosh, and they become one Rosh.
Thus, three Roshim are made from Eser Sefirot of one Rosh. The first
Rosh, which is GE, is called YESHSUT. It is still regarded as Taamim,
and not Behinat Nekudim. The second Rosh is the GE of GAR de
Nekudim, being AHP that were taken off YESH and Tvuna, having
Eser Sefirot in and of themselves. The third Rosh is the AHP that were
taken off the second Rosh, becoming a third Rosh in itself.
The second Rosh is Keter de Nekudim and the third Rosh is Hochma
and Bina de Nekudim. The lower Hey is in the Eynaim of the second
Rosh, and the YHV is in the third Rosh. In the Zivug of Gadlut that
brings them together, when the lower Hey descends to the Peh of the
third Rosh, and the two lower Roshim become one Rosh, the Name
HaVaYaH is found in its order YH VH, as the lower Hey returned to
her place.
The Ayin has Behinat last Hey and first Hey.
This is so because the entire Partzuf Nekudim, called Ohr Eynaim, is
from Behinat Nekudot de SAG that rose and departed from NHY de AK
and became MAN in Nikvey Eynaim. Thus, the Eynaim are like the
first Hey de HaVaYaH because Nekudot de SAG are the first Hey.
The last Behinat Hey that rose along with them to Nikvey Eynaim also
became Behinat Eynaim, and thus the Eynaim are regarded as the last
Hey de HaVaYaH. We thus learn that the Masach in Nikvey Eynaim is
a double Masach from the two Heys together. It has already been
explained that this is the Shoresh for the association of Midat ha
Rachamim with Din, the beginning of which was made in the
connection of the two Heys, the first Hey, and the lower Hey in Nikvey
Eynaim.

--- PAGE 310 ---
45. This is the meaning of what is written in the Tikkunim (Zohar), “I
sleep” opposite the last Hey. In the annulment of Ohr Nekudim, “I
sleep”, meaning “sleep” ( הניש ), and also “I sleep”, the letters of
“second” ( הינש ). This is because Hochma is the First Hey, and
second to Keter. It is known that Taamim are Keter, Nekudot are
Hochma, Tagin are Bina, and Otiot are the lower seven.
It turns out that the Ayin is Behinat Hochma, which are Nekudot.
This is the reason the sages of the congregation were called “The
Eyes of the Congregation”, as it says, “then it shall be, if it be done
in error by the congregation, it being hid from their eyes.”
Ohr Pnimi
45. “I sleep” opposite the last Hey. In the annulment of Ohr Nekudim,
“I sleep”.
The breaking of the vessels was primarily in the Behinat last Hey, and
that’s where the sleeping comes to her. That is why sleep is implied in
the last Hey.
Hochma is the First Hey… …Nekudot are Hochma.
It is written above (Ohr Pnimi item 44) that the Orot that rose to MAN
from NHY de AK contain all the Nekudot de SAG, which are from
Hochma down, with the ZON de AK. It is known that the Partzuf is
named after its highest Sefira, hence the Nekudot are called Hochma.
46. These Nekudot are Behinat Melachim that ruled in Eretz (land of)
Edom and died. This is also the meaning of “ve ha Aretz Haita
Tohu ve Bohu” (Now the earth was unformed and void). Aretz is
the last Hey, which is the Behinat Ayin. She is the one who was
Tohu ve Bohu, which is the matter of the death of the Melachim,
until their Tikun came, at which time it is said “Let there be light.
And there was light.” It is also the meaning of “open Thine eyes,
and behold our desolations.”
47. In order to understand that verse, we shall explain the matter of
the Ayin. It is said that there are nine Nekudot: Kamatz, Patach,
Tzere, Segol, Shva, Holam, Shuruk, Hirik, Kubutz. However, they

--- PAGE 311 ---
also contain Upper Behinot, such as Holam, and Middle, such as
Shuruk. All the rest are below, and their place is under the Otiot.
All this will be explained later.
Ohr Pnimi
47. Upper Behinot, such as Holam, and Middle, such as Shuruk. All
the rest are below.
This is because three Orot operated in the first Nekudim: the Hevel of
the Tabur, which is Behinat Peh of the first Rosh, called YESHSUT.
This Ohr is called Holam, for it shines above the Otiot, because the
first Rosh is not considered actual Ohr Nekudot, but only a Shoresh.
Moreover, even during the Gadlut, it does not unite into one with its
AHP, which are GAR de Nekudim (Ohr Pnimi item 31).
The second Ohr is Hevel ha Yesod, which is Behinat Inner ZON that
shine to GAR de Nekudim, Vav for Ima, Yod for Abba, as the Rav says
in item 31. Also, this Ohr is called Shuruk because it shines inside the
Kelim de AVI.
The third Ohr is Ohr that is poured from Peh de Nekudim down to the
ZAT de Nekudim, which extend from the Parsa by the Zivug de Gadlut
(see Ohr Pnimi item 31). Hence, these are Behinot lower Nekudot
below the Otiot, meaning extending from under the Kelim de Elyon
because Parsa is the end of Sium Etzbaot Raglaim de SAG de AK.
48. Now, all the last seven Nekudot are in the form of Yodin (pl. for
Yod), except the first two Nekudot, Kamatz Patach. These are two
Vavin (pl. for Vav), and Yod.
The thing is that when we count all the Yodin in these seven
Nekudot, they are thirteen Yodin, Gimatria 130, same as Ayin ( יע"ן
). This indicates that the Nekudot come out of the Ayin, and
Kamatz Patach, which are Yod and two Vavin remain. Their
Gimatria is 22, implying the twenty-two Otiot from which the
Kelim de Nekudim were made.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 312 ---
48. All the last seven Nekudot are in the form of Yodin, except the first
two Nekudot.
It is so because the Kamatz Patach are the Shoresh of all the Nekudot,
as the Rav writes here. The Kamatz is Keter and Patach is Hochma.
You already know that the GAR de Nekudim are divided into Galgalta
ve Eynaim, called Keter, and AHP that have departed from this Keter,
called HB.
This division is because of the two Heys that were joined together and
rose to the Eynaim. As a result, the Eser Sefirot de Rosh de Nekudim
divided by way of lower Hey in the Eynaim, and YHV in the AHP.
Interpretation: the Masach de Behina Bet de Hitlabshut, which is the
first Hey, is named Vav here, since it is Behinat Zachar. The last Hey,
having joined with this Vav in the Nikvey Eynaim, is the Behinat
Nekuda inside the Vav. This is because Nekuda indicates Midat ha
Din, as a “black Nekuda without any whiteness at all.”
However, the connection of the Nekuda with the Vav in the Nikvey
Eynaim does not make a Behinat Shuruk there, but only Behinat
Kamatz. This is because the Vav is laid down and the Nekuda under
her is as a Rakia and Nitzotz.
The reason for it is that the AHP are found to be departing because of
this connection of the Rakia and the Nitzotz. Hence, they are called
Kamatz, from the words Kimutz (thrift) and Situm (blockage) that
occurred by the ascent and connection of the lower Hey in the Eynaim.
The YHV that now shine in AHP are in a state of Kimutz and Situm, as
they suffer from two:
1. Their entire Koma is Behina Aleph, since they are Behinat Nekeva de
Keter (see Ohr Pnimi item 23). They need to get He’arat GAR from
the Zachar, being Keter. However, because of the Kamatz in Kli de
Keter they are no longer considered Behinat Rosh, and cannot
incorporate in the Zachar in Keter.
2. They have become Behinat Guf. Hence, these HB are in Behinat
Achor be Achor.

--- PAGE 313 ---
However, in and of themselves they are YHV, as the Rav says that
YHV is in the AHP. This is very interesting since he thus tells us that
Behinat lower Hey, which is the Nekuda under the Patach in the
Nikvey Eynaim makes the Kamatz there. It is written that it did not
come down to Behinat AHP.
Only the Behinat Rakia, being the Kav above the Nekuda, which is
like a Patach, descended by itself to the AHP. It did not take with it
anything of the Nekuda, meaning the lower Hey, but the Masach in the
Peh is only Vav without the Nekuda incorporated in it in the Nikvey
Eynaim.
Thus, it becomes clear that the Masach in Kli de Keter de Nekudim
contains within it a Patach and a Nekuda, which are Rakia and
Nitzotz, meaning the form of Kamatz. The Masach in Kli de HB de
Nekudim is but Hitpashtut of the Patach contained in the Kamatz in
the Nikvey Eynaim, meaning in Kli de Keter, having nothing of the
Nekuda.
However, during the Zivug de AB SAG, causing the lowering of the
lower Hey from the Nikvey Eynaim to the place of Peh as in the
beginning (see Ohr Pnimi item 14), the Kamatz in Kli de Keter
descends and connects with the Kli de HB that was only a Patach
there.
That causes the opening of the Eynaim because the place of the Zivug
that was in the form of Kamatz in the Nikvey Eynaim, blocking the
Orot, has now opened widely, as the AHP returned to the Rosh. This is
because then the Ohr descended to the lower seven Sefirot de
Nekudim, and you can therefore see how all the Nekudot emerged
from the Zivug of Kamatz and Patach.
It turns out that the seven lower Sefirot came out after the descent of
Kamatz to the place of Peh by the Zivug de Gadlut. It turns out that
these seven Nekudot emerged from the Nekuda inside the Kamatz, for
as long as the Nekuda was incorporated in the Nikvey Eynaim, the Peh
of Nekudim there was only the Patach. At that point the seven
Nekudot could not expand from the Peh down for the AHP themselves

--- PAGE 314 ---
were in Behinat Guf and the Patach in the Peh was in Behinat
Malchut de Malchut, called Tabur.
However, after the descent of the lower Hey to the place of the Peh,
the Orot of the seven lower Sefirot opened and came out to their place.
Thus, the entire merit of the lower seven extended from the Nekuda,
which is why they were implied in the form of Yodin, meaning only
Nekudot. This is because they do not extend from the Rakia, which is
a Patach, but rather from the Nitzotz.
It is written, “All the last seven Nekudot are in the form of Yodin,
except the first two Nekudot, Kamatz Patach. These are two Vavin,
and YHV,” for the above reason. The Vavin, being Patach, are
incorporated only in Keter and Hochma, Vav and Nekuda in Keter,
which is the form of Kamatz, and Vav alone in Hochma, which is the
form of Patach. However, there is only Behinat Nekuda in the seven
lower Sefirot, since this is where they emerge.
The Nekudot come out of the Ayin.
Meaning that through the descent of the lower Hey from the Eynaim
all the Nekudot came out.
The twenty-two Otiot from which the Kelim de Nekudim were
made.
The Kelim are called Otiot and the number twenty-two contains all the
Behinot Kelim in reality. It has already been explained how all the ZAT
emerged from the Zivug of Kamatz and Patach. They also produced
Behinat knew Kelim, called Kelim de Achor.
49. It is not surprising that the Kelim were registered and implied in
the first two Nekudot, the best among them. The thing is that the
Kelim for the rest of the Nekudot were made of these first two
Nekudot, namely Keter Hochma. These are also the ones that
procreated and elicited Kelim for the Sefirot below them.
There is yet another reason: it is known that the seven lower
Nekudot are the seven Melachim that died. However, the first did
not die. It is also known that Behinat death is the breaking of the

--- PAGE 315 ---
Kli, hence the seven other Nekudot remained without a Kli, but
only Ohr, which is the Behinot of the Nekudot.
However, the first ones did not die; they remained with their
Kelim. Thus, the Orot conceal and clothe within the Kelim. They
are named after the Kelim, which are the twenty-two Orot, implied
in the Kamatz and Patach as we have mentioned.
Ohr Pnimi
49. The first did not die.
Rather, the Kamatz returned to the Nikvey Eynaim as it was before.
Also, the Patach remained alone once more in Kli de Hochma. It is so
because when they are in their place as they were when they were first
created, they are considered Kelim de Panim, where annulment and
breaking do not apply.
50. The Kamatz indicates the Keter, and the Keter is Taamim. The
Patach indicates Hochma, and they are the Nekudot. Hence, these
two Nekudot are called Kamatz and Patach, as they imply the
above matter.
As long as only Taamim de SAG elicit, being the Behinat Orot AHP,
the Orot were still blocked and stint. When Behinat Nekudot came,
which are Hochma – Patach, being the Behinat Ayin, then they
opened in the “opening of the eyes,” as mentioned in the
Tikkunim. This is the matter of the point of Patach. However, in
the Behinot Taamim, which are Keter, it is Kamatz, because the
Orot were blocked and stint.
Ohr Pnimi
50. The Patach indicates Hochma.
This means that the Nekudot, meaning the seven lower Sefirot came
out of this Zivug de Kamatz Patach, which are Keter and Hochma.
Then the Nekudot de SAG emerge and appear, as will be written
henceforth.

--- PAGE 316 ---
Taamim de SAG elicit, being the Behinat Orot AHP… …When
Behinat Nekudot came… …opened in the “opening of the eyes.”
You must understand the oppositeness that occurred because of the
ascent of the lower Hey to the Eynaim, where the Nekudot preceded
the Taamim. The primary difference between Taamim and Nekudot is
that Taamim de SAG, reaching the Tabur, did not connect with the
lower Hey, meaning the Inner ZON de AK.
However, the Nekudot de SAG, which are the lower nine from
Hochma down, connected with the lower Hey and rose to MAN to the
Eynaim (item 6). Thus, the opposite occurred here in the Partzuf that
came out of this Zivug de Nikvey Eynaim.
The Behinot Nekudot, meaning the connection of the first Hey with the
lower Hey was made in the Nikvey Eynaim. Hence, the Behinat
Taamim, meaning the Behinat first Hey that did not connect
whatsoever with the lower Hey, came out in the AHP (see Ohr Pnimi
item 48).
Thus, the Nekudot were found to be above Nikvey Eynaim and
Taamim below, in the AHP. This is the opposite of their stance in SAG
where the Taamim are above Tabur and the Nekudot below Tabur.
However, this is still not considered departure to the Nekudot. As long
as the Behinot Nekudot are in Nikvey Eynaim, they are not disclosed
outwardly, as they are there as Kamatz (see Ohr Pnimi item 48).
Afterwards, by the Zivug de AB SAG where the Nekudot come out
from the Eynaim to the Peh under the Taamim, it is considered that the
Nekuda departed and separated from there. The Eynaim remain as a
mere Patach, without a Nekuda, and then the Eynaim open, the AHP
return to the Rosh, and the ZAT come to their place.
It is written, “As long as only Taamim de SAG elicit, being the
Behinat Orot AHP, the Orot were still blocked.” Meaning, as long as
the lower Hey was in the Eynaim and the Nekudot could not come out,
but only the Taamim as YHV cleaned from the lower Hey, “the Orot
were still blocked and stint.”

--- PAGE 317 ---
“When Behinat Nekudot came, which are Hochma – Patach, being
the Behinat Ayin, then they opened in the ‘opening of the eyes’.” At
that time the Nekuda that was attached to the opening of the Eynaim
came down and the Ohr of Nekudot de SAG appeared outwardly,
which are Behinat Hochma (see Ohr Pnimi item 45).
51. Now we shall return to the matter of the verse “open Thine eyes.”
When the Behinat Ayin comes, which are the Nekudot, it is then
said, “open Thine eyes.” This is because then it is with open eyes.
It has already been explained that all these Behinot are in the
name SAG. This name implies Bina, which is Upper Gevura, upon
which the Dinim are dependent; hence the matter of the
annulment of the Melachim was in that Behina of SAG.
In SAG itself too there is Behinat Taamim, which are also called
AB, although they are in SAG. Yet, the Nekudot de SAG are the
essence of SAG itself, which are SAG de SAG, and there was the
annulment and the death.
This is the meaning of “they are together become impure,” for all
the annulment was in the name SAG. SAG itself, however, is
indicated to come from the words “Nasogu Achor” (they are
turned away back), which is the annulment of the Melachim.
52. The Ayin is also named after SAG, like the above AHP. This is
because when there were the above three Behinot AHP, which are
the Taamim, their name SAG was Behinat HaVaYaH, which is
SAG: Yod, Hey, Vav, Hey. However, in the Ayin, which is Behinat
Nekudot, it is the SAG of three times Ekie, which is also SAG in
Gimatria, and this is the SAG in the Ayin.
53. Now, all these Ekie from these three, take all the Behinot twenty-
two Otiot, implied in the Kamatz Patach, to make of them Kelim
through the Histaklut Ayin in them. Thus, each of their names Ekie
consists of all the Behinot twenty-two Otiot.
Thus, the three names Ekie with the three times twenty-two Otiot,
with the Kolel (included), amount to 130, which is Ayin in

--- PAGE 318 ---
Gimatria. This is how the name SAG is implied in the Ayin too.
54. This is the meaning of “open Thine eyes, and behold,” because in
AHP there are three times SAG, which is Pekach (open) in
Gimatria, with the Kolel, and after them comes Behinat Eynaim.
This is the meaning of “open Thine eyes,” because these three Ekie
in the Eynaim are Behinat Ekie in Yodin, Gimatria 161, the same
number as Einecha (Thine eyes), with the Kolel. This is also the
meaning of “and behold our desolations,” for here was a great
desolation, and annulment of the Melachim.
Ohr Pnimi
54. “open Thine eyes, and behold,” because in AHP there are three
times SAG, which is Pekach in Gimatria, with the Kolel, and after
them comes Behinat Eynaim.
This means that the prayer is to straighten the order and make the
YHV, which are the Taamim, above, and the SAG in the Eynaim,
which is the Behinat connection of the two Heys there come down
past the place of the Taamim.
It is so because after the Nekuda attached to the Patach in the Eynaim
comes down, and the Patach remains without the connection with the
lower Hey, the Eynaim open and form a Patach . This is the meaning
of “and after them comes Behinat Eynaim,” meaning after the
Taamim implied in the Gimatria “open”.
“and behold our desolations,” for here was a great desolation, and
annulment of the Melachim.
This is because through the returning of the order to its place as in the
previous item, the lower Hey will come down and the YHV will return
up. Hence, the entire great desolation, which occurred because of the
breaking of the vessels, will be corrected with the entire Tikun Kelim
we have in Olam ha Tikun today.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 319 ---
H P
ISTAKLUT NIMIT
Bear in mind that Olam ha Nekudim is the first Shoresh that Olamot
ABYA stem from. It is here that the association of Midat ha Rachamim
with Din is erected and rooted; it is the first beginning. This is the
meaning of the ten utterances from which the world was created,
referring to the ten Kelim for the Hitlabshut of the Ohr Elyon, as we
have already elaborated on above (Ohr Pnimi, beginning of Part 4).
However, in the previous three Partzufim of AK there was only one
utterance. In other words, the Ohr Elyon clothed only one Kli, called
Malchut, but the nine Sefirot prior to Malchut were clean from any
Behinat Kli.
Hence, we should thoroughly understand the evolution of matters
brought in the Rav’s words in this part, and how they come and
connect by way of cause and consequence from the three previous
Partzufim. We shall begin in explaining the order of the creation of
this Partzuf Nekudim from its Partzuf Elyon, called SAG de AK.
1. It has already been explained that the primary factor in the creation of
any new Partzuf is the Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi on each
other. This Masach and Ohr Hozer that it raises, extend and clothes
the Ohr Pnimi of the Partzuf. To the extent that it clothes and extends
the Ohr Pnimi, it rejects the Ohr Makif from the Partzuf, the Ohr
Makif that belongs to the Partzuf (see Part 4, Chap 1, Ohr Pnimi item
7).
This Bitush of the Ohr Makif purifies the Masach from its Aviut until
it raises it to its Shoresh, meaning purifies it entirely from its Behinat
Aviut de Guf until it equalizes with the Malchut de Rosh of that
Partzuf. This is considered that the Masach rose and was incorporated

--- PAGE 320 ---
there in the Masach in Malchut de Rosh, in the Zivug from below
upward.
Then the Masach de Guf was renewed with a new Aviut, raising a new
Koma of Eser Sefirot in Rosh, Toch, Sof. This new Koma is considered
a new Partzuf, the son of the previous Partzuf, where the new
Hizdakchut and Zivug are made (see Part 3, Table of Questions, item
210).
That Ohr of the newly born Partzuf is Behinat part of the Ohr Makif
of the Partzuf Elyon. This is because the Ohr Makif appears only by
the creation of the Neshamot and the Partzufim of the Tachtonim, as
our sages have written, “The Son of David doth not come before all
the Neshamot in the Guf end.” This refers to the entire well of the
Neshamot contained in the inclusive Ohr Makif Elyon. This is also the
meaning of the Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi, as this is the entire
manner of its appearance.
You find that the Masach de Guf, which is the Masach de Tabur, is the
primary operator in the emanation of the Tachton. This is because it
ascends to mingle in the Zivug Elyon of the Rosh and raises the
Reshimot of the Eser Sefirot that remain after the Histalkut Orot of the
Guf de Elyon to the Maatzil, being Malchut de Rosh (as written in Part
4, Table of Topics, item 210).
The reason for it is that concealment and revelation always come as
one in Kedusha. Know, that where you find concealment, this is also
the place of the revelation. They cling to one another as the wick to
the candle.
Moreover, the covering and the concealment is the only preparation
for its appearance. Thus, if it weren’t for the concealment, the
appearance would never be, as there is no existence for the candlelight
without the wick.
You already know that the first appearance of this Masach de Tabur,
in its first appearance, meaning in the first Partzuf of AK, was the sole
generator of the existence of the darkness and the vacant Halal in the
Olamot. Also, the entire difference between Olam Ein Sof that filled

--- PAGE 321 ---
the entire reality and Partzuf AK, which is only Behinat thin Kav of
Ohr, occurred because of this Masach de Tabur.
This Masach detained the Ohr Elyon, did not let it expand and fill the
entire reality as it would, and put a Sof and Sium on the Ohr Elyon in
the middle point, as has been written elaborately in previous parts.
Even though the Masach in Malchut de Rosh set up the matter of the
detainment and the Hakaa on the Ohr Elyon, it is done only in
potential. This is because there is no conduct of Halbasha in the Rosh;
all the more so detainment on Halbasha. Rather, anything marked as
“potential”, manifests and appears in the Guf “in actual”.
The Behinat Halbasha made in the Ohr Hozer de Rosh, meaning on
the first nine Sefirot, appears in the first nine Sefirot of the Guf, whose
place is called “from Peh to Tabur”. The detainment and the rejection
made in the Rosh appear in the Malchut de Guf, whose place is called
“from Tabur to Sium Raglin”.
Thus it is made completely dark from Sium Raglin down, for the Kav
of Ohr extending from Ein Sof stops there. It is known that that ending
point is in the Behinat Olam ha Zeh, meaning our very earth, as it
says, “And His feet shall stand upon the mount of Olives.”
2. We’ve learned that the entire Behinat Din in reality is packed and
sealed in the Masach de Tabur in its first appearance, which is the first
Partzuf de AK. Hence, a strong Bitush took place there between the
Ohr Makif and the Ohr Pnimi. This is because the Ohr Pnimi that
clothed in Akudim of this Partzuf was very small compared to the Ohr
Elyon that remained without, which is all the previous Ohr that filled
the entire reality, called Ohr Makif with respect to that Partzuf. Also,
the place of the Bitush was in the Masach de Tabur. Had it not been
for that Masach, the Ohr Makif would have entered the Pnimiut of the
reality as before.
This generated the Hizdakchut of the Masach and the Histalkut Orot
of the Akudim of the first Partzuf de AK, called Partzuf Galgalta. The
Masach with all the Reshimot that remained of the Eser Sefirot rose

--- PAGE 322 ---
and incorporated in the Zivug of the Malchut de Rosh of this Partzuf,
except the last Behina, which does not leave a Reshima.
This Zivug occurred there on the Reshimo of the Upper Behina
contained in the Masach, which is the Reshimo de Behina Gimel,
because the Reshimo de Behina Dalet disappeared, as it is the last
Behina. Hence, the Zivug was made there on Behina Gimel, eliciting
Komat Hochma by the power of the ascent of Malchut to the Hotem
since she was incorporated in the Masach de Tabur consisting only of
Behina Gimel (see Part 3, Table of Topics, item 210).
It explains there that after the Aviut was recognized in the Reshimot de
Masach de Tabur, which come from Aviut de Guf, they are found to
descend from the Rosh to the Guf instantaneously, meaning to Behina
Gimel of the Guf, called Chazeh. From the Chazeh up it elicits Eser
Sefirot de Rosh through a Zivug with the Ohr Elyon, up to the Peh of
the Upper Partzuf. From the Chazeh down, it expands in Eser Sefirot
de Rosh, Toch, Sof of the Guf, ending in the place of Tabur de Elyon.
It is so because it cannot expand below Tabur, as it lacks Behina
Dalet, and under the Tabur it is the place of Behina Dalet.
3. You find that this Masach de Tabur obstructed the Ohr Makif of the
first Partzuf de AK and did not let it expand from Tabur down. Now,
by the force of the Bitush that the Ohr Makif made in it, it has been
qualified to extend and clothe a complete Partzuf in RTS. Thus, it is
precisely the force of concealment that overturned and became a force
of revelation.
Moreover, the Masach de Tabur of this second Partzuf de AK, is also
purified by the force of the Bitush of Ohr Makif on it. Finally, it
ascends and mingles in the Zivug de Rosh of that Partzuf, and it too is
renewed there with a new Aviut de Behina Bet. This is because here
too the last Behina, namely Behina Gimel, disappeared and did not
leave a Reshima.
After the Aviut of the Guf in the Masach had been recognized, it
descends to the place of Behina Bet de Guf, having the same value as
its Chazeh de Elyon, because Tabur of this Partzuf AB is Behina

--- PAGE 323 ---
Gimel. Since there is no Behina Dalet at all in the second Partzuf de
AK, the Chazeh is considered its Behina Bet.
Hence, the new Koma, emanated from it, descends to the place of its
Chazeh and produces Eser Sefirot de Rosh from the Chazeh upward,
and Eser Sefirot de Guf with Toch and Sof from the Chazeh
downward. This Partzuf is the third Partzuf de AK, called SAG de AK.
Thus we find once more that the force of concealment has turned into
a force of revelation. This is because the Masach de Tabur, which
obstructed the Ohr Makif de Partzuf AB and did not let it expand
below even a bit, has now been renewed and expanded into a new
Partzuf with RTS.
4. The matter of Masach de Tabur does not refer solely to the point of
Tabur, but to the entire Eser Sefirot in it. Also, the point of Tabur is
but the force of Sium on Keter Hochma and Bina, after which there are
two more points: the point of Yesod, and the point of Sium Raglin. The
force of the Sium on ZA is at the point of Yesod and the force of the
Sium on the Malchut is at the point of Sium Raglin. They are all
contained in Masach de Tabur, and remember that.
This entire place called “from Tabur to Sium Raglin”, is but a single
Sefira, the bottom Sefira of the Guf, called Malchut. The first
Tzimtzum was on her and the existence of the Masach, detaining and
rejecting the Ohr Elyon from clothing in her, had been erected in her.
Since the Ohr Elyon contains Eser Sefirot, this Masach in Malchut
contains ten forces of Sium for these Eser Sefirot too. The extension of
ten forces of Sium is called “from Tabur down”. Now you can see that
the whole issue of the above Bitush of the Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi,
expanding the Gevul of the Masach de Tabur, as has been explained
above, all this refers to that place from Tabur down.
5. We have yet to understand what is brought in several places, that the
place of MA and BON is from Tabur of the Partzuf downward, as well
as the matter of the five Sefirot TNHYM of the Partzuf, whose place is
from Tabur of every Partzuf downward. According to the above, there
is only one Sefira there, Sefirat Malchut.

--- PAGE 324 ---
The thing is that the Rav has already noted in several places that there
is no Malchut without NHY, as it is written, “three flocks of sheep
lying there by it.” The reason for it has already been explained in Part
5, Ohr Pnimi item 45. It states that the three Sefirot Hod, Yesod,
Malchut, are all but an expansion of the Kli Malchut. Thus, in Kli
Malchut itself there are three Sefirot HYM.
It is also known that in Behinat Achoraim, the Netzah and Hod are
considered one Sefira, and they are mingled in one another
indistinguishably. Hence, all these four Sefirot NHYM are only
considered Sefirat Malchut, but when the Ohr reaches them from the
Behinat Panim, the Netzah is then separated from the Hod, and the
merit of Hod becomes apparent. Then they are considered two
separate Sefirot.
However, even then, since the four Sefirot were once connected, they
no longer part. Rather, it is considered that Netzah contains the four
Sefirot NHYM from the Behinat “right”, and Hod contains the four
Sefirot NHYM from the Behinat “left”.
You can therefore see how there are always four Sefirot Netzah, Hod,
Yesod, Malchut in the Malchut. Thus, you should know that even
though the place from Tabur de AK down is indeed only Sefirat
Malchut, still there are four Sefirot NHYM there.
We have yet to explain the issue of MA and BON, which are always
from Tabur down. This is a completely different matter, for it is not
considered among the Sefirot of the five Behinot de Ohr Yashar, when
the place from Tabur down is considered the four Sefirot NHYM.
Rather, it is by measurements of Koma, of the five Partzufim
Galgalta, AB, SAG, MA and BON.
Know, that from the perspective of the measurement of the Koma, MA
and BON are considered as one Koma that comes out by Zivug de
Hakaa in the Masach, whose Aviut is from Behina Aleph, extending
only Komat ZA. The reason is that here there are but four Behinot of
Aviut in the Masach: Komat Keter comes out on Masach de Behina
Dalet etc. and Komat ZA on Masach de Behina Aleph.

--- PAGE 325 ---
However, on a Masach that is already purified, such as Behinat Keter,
from which Komat Malchut should stem, there is no Hakaa between
that and the Ohr Elyon, in such a way that a Komat Partzuf would
emerge off it in Rosh, Toch, Sof. This is because it is not in Shinui
Tzura from the Ohr Elyon. Hence, there is only Zivug de Hakaa until
the measure of Aviut de Behina Aleph.
Moreover, even Behina Aleph is considered a very frail Aviut, and in
Masach de Behina Aleph the Zivug de Hakaa is called Histaklut Dak,
from which there is no Hitpashtut Partzuf in Behinat RTS (see Part 3,
Chap 11, item 6, and Ohr Pnimi there).
This Partzuf MA and BON that came out on Masach de Behina Aleph
was only through a special Tikun, meaning by the ascent of the lower
Hey to the Eynaim, where the two Heyin connected together, the First
Hey with the Last Hey (this Part, item 44). The association of this
Aviut with Behina Aleph induced a sufficient Zivug de Hakaa to
produce a Partzuf in RTS, called MA and BON. However, without the
association of the last Hey, Behina Aleph too is unfit for Zivug on
producing a Partzuf.
6. It’s been explained that the very cause of the elicitation of the Koma
de Behina Aleph, called MA and BON, is the last Hey, meaning
Malchut de AK. Thus, two Partzufim are related to the last Hey, being
Behina Dalet: the first is Partzuf Galgalta de AK, whose level reaches
Keter, and the second is Partzuf Nekudim de AK, which are MA and
BON.
The Koma of the latter reaches ZA, which in turn elicited because of
the ascent of the lower Hey, which is Behina Dalet, to Nikvey Eynaim.
The reason Behina Dalet did not produce Komat Keter here, as in
Partzuf Galgalta de AK, will be explained below.
Thus you find that the force of Tzimtzum in Masach de Tabur of
Partzuf Galgalta broadens through the Bitush of Ohr Makif in Ohr
Pnimi (see item 4 here). It is so because once it had purified into
Behina Gimel, RTS of the second Partzuf de AK had expanded from it,
called AB.

--- PAGE 326 ---
After it had purified into Behina Bet, a third Partzuf, called Partzuf
SAG, expanded from it in RTS. Finally, after it had purified into
Behina Aleph, Partzuf Nekudim expanded from it, called MA and BON
de AK.
7. We must thoroughly understand, that the Masach had already been
purified into Behina Aleph, meaning the measure of Aviut found in Kli
de Hochma. Thus, how can Behina Dalet participate with her Aviut
here too, generating the Koma de MA and BON through the both of
them?
Furthermore, if Behina Dalet really has joined with Behina Aleph
here, there should have been a Partzuf in Komat Keter here, like
Partzuf Galgalta de AK. Thus, why did only Komat ZA come out here,
meaning at the measure of Komat Behina Aleph, and not Komat
Behina Dalet?
The thing is that it is known that there is no issue of Hizdakchut in the
Kelim. Hence, even though the Masach of Behina Dalet that operated
in Partzuf Galgalta de AK has been purified when emanating AB, the
Kelim themselves were not changed by that in any way. The Aviut de
Behina Dalet remained in them as in the beginning, before the
Hizdakchut of the Masach.
However, after the Ohr departed from them, no operation manifested
off them, since a Kli without an Ohr is like a body without a soul.
Therefore, after Nekudot de Partzuf SAG expanded and illuminated
from Tabur to Sium Raglin de Partzuf Galgalta de AK (see Ohr Pnimi
item 1), because of this He’arat SAG, the Aviut de Behina Dalet came
back to life in the Kelim from Tabur de AK down.
In that state the Aviut of Behina Dalet in the Kelim from Tabur de AK
down, mixed with the Masach in the Kelim of Nekudot de SAG. This
is because during the ascent of the Masach to the Maatzil, it was
incorporated in all the Reshimot in the Sefirot from which the Orot had
left (see Partzuf 4, Chap 4, Ohr Pnimi item 50).
Thus, as it is incorporated of the Reshimot de Sefirot de SAG, which
are Behina Bet, it was also incorporated of the Reshimot in the Kelim

--- PAGE 327 ---
from Tabur down, being Behina Dalet. It raised those two Behinot to
the Maatzil together, which is Malchut de Rosh de SAG.
You already know that this Masach consists solely of Aviut de Behina
Aleph, because Behina Bet is the last Behina here, which does not
leave a Reshimo after her, only from Behinat Hitlabshut. Thus, the
Masach consists of two Reshimot that remained after the Histalkut
Orot from the Sefirot de SAG, being Behina Bet de Hitlabshut and
Behina Aleph de Hamshacha, called Zachar and Nekeva.
Thus, Malchut de Rosh too rose to Behina Aleph de Rosh, meaning
according to the measure of Aviut contained in the Reshimo that
remained in the Masach, being Behina Aleph, as the Rav wrote
concerning Partzuf AB (Part 5, item 6 and Ohr Pnimi there). However,
the Reshimo de Behina Dalet is also incorporated in the Masach that
remained in the Kelim below Tabur de Galgalta de AK after the
Histalkut Nekudot de SAG from within them.
Thus, since the Masach is primarily Behina Aleph and Behina Dalet is
subordinate to it, and is not at all from its Behina, it is therefore drawn
with it to the Nikvey Eynaim, which is Behina Aleph de Rosh. For that
reason the Zivug was not made on Aviut de Behina Dalet, extending
Komat Keter, but only on Behina Aleph, extending Komat ZA.
8. With all that is explained above, you will see that the Tikkunim depend
primarily on MA and BON, standing from Tabur of every Partzuf
downward. This is so because that is the place of the Din and lack of
every Partzuf, as in the Tabur of the first Partzuf de AK (see items 1,
2), and in all the Partzufim through the end of Assiya.
Also, every Partzuf Tachton comes only to fulfill and complement the
place of this lack in the Elyon, because of the rejection and detainment
force, found in the Masach of that Tabur on the Ohr Elyon. It is as he
writes above, that any Tachton uncovers a part of that Ohr which was
rejected by the Masach de Tabur de Elyon.
Thus, the more the Partzufim and Neshamot increase, the more that
Gevul from Tabur down will expand, broaden and become fit for the
reception of the Ohr Elyon. Finally, the comprehensive Ohr Makif,

--- PAGE 328 ---
called Ohr Makif de Ein Sof, will appear, and then there will be the
Gmar Tikun.
Hence, the Tikkunim depend primarily only on Partzufim MA and
BON that stand from Tabur down. Remember that, as this is an
elementary concept in the entire scope of the wisdom.
Thus, this Olam ha Nekudim that the Rav deals with here, is the first
MA and BON that appeared in the Olamot. It is cold merely BON,
because there are no remains of it for Olamot ABYA, but only the
Behinat Nekeva, called BON. This is because the Zachar that extends
the Mochin, meaning the GAR, is called MA, and the Nekeva that
receives the Mochin is called BON.
9. Now we shall come the actual words of the Rav. We shall begin by
explaining the matter of the Kelim of Partzuf Nekudim. The Rav says
(Part 6, item 19) that the Kelim came out by the Histaklut Eynaim in
AHP.
We must understand why the emergence of the Kelim de Nekudim is
different from the other Partzufim. It is known that Malchut de Rosh
expands from her and within her into ten Kelim from above downward
in the entire measure that her Ohr Hozer clothed the Eser Sefirot de
Rosh.
Accordingly, Malchut de Eynaim should expand as Kelim from Nikvey
Eynaim down to the extent that she clothed from Nikvey Eynaim up.
Hence, there should have been a Histaklut in the Nikvey Eynaim, not
in the AHP.
Indeed, there is a profound matter here. We have learned in item 7 that
the lower Hey, being Behina Dalet, rose to Nikvey Eynaim, which is
Behina Aleph. However, there was still no Zivug on Behina Dalet, but
on the Reshimo de Behina Bet de Hitlabshut, called Awzen, Behinat
Zachar, and on the Reshimo de Behina Aleph de Hamshacha, called
Hotem Peh (see elaborately Ohr Pnimi item 44).
Thus, it turns out that the Kelim de Nekudim do not have anything of
Behinat lower Hey, namely Behina Dalet. This is because the lower

--- PAGE 329 ---
Hey remained in the Nikvey Eynaim and her Behina did not expand
downward.
We might therefore ask: “How were GAR de Nekudim divided into
two Roshim, GE, being Keter, and AHP, being HB, as it is known that
the Lower Hey is in the Eynaim and the YHV in AHP?”
We must remember that after the Reshimot rose to Zivug in the Nikvey
Eynaim de Rosh SAG, they were incorporated in the Zivug de Rosh,
and their Aviut was renewed. Then they instantaneously descended
from there to their appropriate place in the Guf, namely Tabur.
Then the Ohr Elyon descended once more on the Masach and its
Reshimot in Zivug de Hakaa, eliciting Eser Sefirot de Rosh from the
Tabur upwards, and Eser Sefirot de Guf from the Tabur downwards, as
in all the Partzufim. Hence, the Lower Hey became incorporated once
more in the Masach at the place of the Tabur, and the AHP descended
outwardly once more as in the Rosh.
Similarly in GAR de Nekudim themselves, after they divide into GE
and AHP, the Lower Hey is found in the Eynaim once more. However,
from the Eynaim down the Lower Hey does not expand whatsoever,
because the Histaklut, namely the Zivug, is not done in Behina Dalet,
meaning the Lower Hey, but in Behina Bet and Behina Aleph, being
the AHP. Thus we see that the Kelim de Nekudim are only from
Behina Bet and Behina Aleph, and have nothing of Behina Dalet even
though Malchut de Rosh is incorporated of the Lower Hey.
Thus, you can see, regarding the matter of the association of Midat ha
Rachamim with Din, which are the connection of the two Heyin: the
First Hey and the Lower Hey, that association remains fixed and
existing in Nikvey Eynaim. It is not so in Behinat AHP, which came
out, because in the AHP that came out there is only Behinat Vav,
which is only the Masach of the First Hey. This was so because
Behinat Lower Hey did not extend to them from the Nikvey Eynaim.
Now you can understand the matter of the two kinds of NHY that
illuminated in HB de Nekudim, which are NHY de Keter and NHY de
AK, meaning Yesod de AK (Part 6, item 16). Also, the matter of the

--- PAGE 330 ---
Daat de Elyon in GAR de Nekudim (Part 6, item 26), and the issue of
the Daat de Tachton, which is the Rosh of the ZAT and the first
Melech de Nekudim, to be brought below in Part 7.
10. In order to understand that we must have thorough knowledge about
the emergence of the seven lower Sefirot through the connection of the
lower Hey in the Nikvey Eynaim.
Know, that this Lower Hey made four steps before coming to her
place in the lower seven of Nekudim.
First she came to the Nikvey Eynaim as Holam, meaning after her
descent from her Hitkalelut in Rosh de SAG to her place in Tabur de
AK. Histaklut Aleph took place on her double Masach and Eser Sefirot
came out from Tabur up to the Chazeh, called Rosh ha Aleph, or
YESHSUT. In that place the lower Hey in the Masach is in Behinat
Holam above Otiot YHV, called GAR de Nekudim. This is the first
step.
After that, she expanded from Tabur down to Behinat Guf from the
Behinat AHP that come out from the Rosh. These AHP are the GAR de
Nekudim. It is known that they are also considered Behinat Rosh in
and of themselves, in complete Eser Sefirot, which also divide into
Galgalta and Eynaim and AHP (see Ohr Pnimi item 48). GE is the
Keter de Nekudim and AHP are the HB de Nekudim.
After that the lower Hey comes once more in the Nikvey Eynaim,
meaning in Masach de Kli de Keter, called Yesod de Keter, or NHY de
Keter. This is because the place of the Zivug is called Yesod, or NHY,
and here the lower Hey is called “the point of Kamatz”, meaning
Rakia and Nitzotz, or a Kav and a Nekuda below it. This is the second
step.
Here is where it is most noticed that the lower Hey is above, in the
Eynaim, and YHV are below, in the AHP. This means that these AHP
have nothing of the lower Hey, connected in the Nikvey Eynaim,
because the Zivug and the Histaklut were made only in the AHP, being
only Behinat First Hey. Thus, only Keter carries the lower Hey inside
it, but the HB are clean from the lower Hey.

--- PAGE 331 ---
11. The difference between Behinat Holam and Behinat Kamatz is that the
point of Holam (being the lower Hey incorporated in the Masach de
Rosh ha Aleph that stands at the place of Tabur) remains permanently
there. She does not move from there because the first Rosh is not
considered Behinat Nekudim at all (Ohr Pnimi item 20).
However, there are ascents and descents in the point of Kamatz, which
is the Behinat lower Hey incorporated in Keter of Nekudim. This is
because during the Zivug AB SAG this lower Hey is found to be
descending from the Nikvey Eynaim to the place of Peh, meaning
below the Otiot YHV, when HB de Nekudim return to Behinat Rosh.
This is because these HB de Nekudim were not rejected from the Rosh
to Behinat Guf, but only because of the lower Hey that came in the
Nikvey Eynaim, meaning NHY de Keter, where she was like the
Holam above the Otiot YHV. Hence, the Otiot YHV, which are HB de
Nekudim came out to Behinat Guf.
Now, however, when the lower Hey descended from there below the
Otiot YHV, meaning as a point of Kamatz, whose conduct is to come
under the Otiot, the HB return once more and join the Keter to Behinat
Rosh.
This matter is considered as Netzah, Hod, Yesod de Keter having
clothed inside Hochma and Bina, becoming a Mochin for them. It
means that it brought them back to Behinat GAR and Rosh. This is
because when NHY de Keter were above them, they were rejected
from the Rosh and became Behinat Guf. Now, however, that NHY de
Keter have stretched and the lower Hey in them descended under their
Otiot, they acquired the Behinat GAR once more. This is why it is
called Hitlabshut for Mochin. This is the third step of the lower Hey,
since she descended under the Otiot.
12. Now you can see what is always brought in the Rav’s words, that
Yesod de Elyon is Daat to the Tachton, as here is where it is rooted.
When NHY de Keter are above HB like the Holam above the Otiot,
these YHV de HB are considered Behinat HGT, meaning a Guf where
Yod is Hesed, Hey is Gevura, and Vav is Tifferet.

--- PAGE 332 ---
However, after NHY de Keter stretched and clothed in the HB as
Kamatz under Otiot YHV, and the HB returned to the Rosh, the YHV
have now become Behinat Hochma, Bina, Daat in the Rosh. The Yod
became Hochma, the Hey, Bina, and the Vav, Daat.
Thus, it is considered that Netzah de Keter raised Hesed de HB to
Hochma by clothing in them, the Hod de Keter raised Gevura to the
degree of Bina, and the Yesod de Keter raised the Tifferet de HB to the
degree of Daat. You find that through Hitlabshut Yesod de Keter in
Tifferet de HB, the Tifferet became Sefirat Daat. This is the meaning
of Yesod de Elyon becoming Daat through Hitlabshut in the Tachton.
You should know that there are two Behinot of Daat: Upper Daat, and
Lower Daat. This is because the Tifferet de HB that has now become
Behinat Daat de HB is called Upper Daat, since these Kelim de HB
have nothing of the lower Hey, only from Behinat First Hey (Histaklut
Pnimit here, item 9).
For that reason it has no connection with the ZON, which are mixed
with the lower Hey (Histaklut Pnimit here, item 6). Know, that this
Daat that shines in the Kelim that have Hitkalelut with the lower Hey,
is called Lower Daat.
13. Thus we have clarified that the Zivug and Hitlabshut NHY de Keter in
HB de Nekudim is useful only to HB, since it returned them to Behinat
Rosh. However, for the ZAT de Nekudim, these GAR do not illuminate
at all because of the lower Hey in the Peh de Nekudim. These GAR
cannot shine to her because they are not incorporated in her at all.
Therefore, we need a second Zivug for GAR to shine for ZAT as well,
and this is the Zivug of NHY de AK to HB de Nekudim. From this
Zivug the ZAT extend with the Daat Tachton, as will be explained.
First we must thoroughly understand the matter of NHY de AK. You
already know that these NHY are the Shoresh of this whole connection
of the two Heyin and their ascent to Nikvey Eynaim. First, the SAG
expanded to the Sium Raglin de AK, and clothed the Inner NHY de AK,
meaning the first Partzuf de AK.

--- PAGE 333 ---
After that, Ohr SAG, being Behina Bet, mixed with the Behina Dalet
in the Inner NHY de AK. Therefore, when the Masach rose to Rosh de
SAG to be renewed in a new Zivug, it raised with it the Reshimo de
Behina Dalet, incorporated in it. By that the lower Hey, which is
Behina Dalet, rose to Nikvey Eynaim (see Ohr Pnimi item 6), and this
ascent is called Tzimtzum NHY de AK.
The Zivug made in the Nikvey Eynaim took Bina and ZON of each
degree out, AHP de Rosh became the Guf, and HGT, Bina and ZON de
Guf became NHY. Bina and ZON de NHY departed from the Atzilut of
the Partzuf completely, meaning to Behinat Separated BYA. For that
reason Partzuf SAG de AK ended in the place of Tabur de AK, and the
Parsa was stretched below it (see Ohr Pnimi item 6).
14. We must thoroughly understand what the Rav has written above (Part
6, items 11, 12), that the Tzimtzum and Parsa are two separate matters.
This is because Tzimtzum NHY de AK was to diminish the Ohr for the
purpose of Nekudim, and the Tikun of the Parsa is not for Olam ha
Nekudim itself, which is Olam ha Atzilut, but for Olam Beria below it.
This means that here is the beginning and the Shoresh of the three
Olamot Beria, Yetzira, Assiya, called “Separated Olamot”. This is
done by Tzimtzum NHY de AK, where the Reshimot rose from the two
Heyin: the First Hey, and the lower Hey. They connected in NHY de
AK and came in Nikvey Eynaim, and from this Zivug came the core of
the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim, as lower Hey in the Eynaim and YHV in
the AHP.
It is known that the Reshimot de ZON that came from NHY de AK
returned to their place below Tabur like the GAR de Nekudim,
meaning also through the division of the degree, where Bina and ZON
departed from the degree. It turns out that that Ohr de ZON that
returned to its place after the Zivug de Nikvey Eynaim in Rosh de SAG,
did not fill the entire Eser Sefirot from Tabur de AK ha Pnimi down,
but only the Keter and Hochma in it. Bina, ZA and Malchut in it went
completely out of Atzilut and became the Behinat three Olamot Beria,
Yetzira, Assiya, and all this was done through Tzimtzum NHY de AK.

--- PAGE 334 ---
However, the Parsa is a special Tikun for the purpose of Beria,
meaning for the purpose of the three Separated Olamot that were
separated from Ohr Atzilut because of the division of the degree.
However, they are all named after Bina, meaning Olam Beria, because
this is the highest Sefira.
This matter of the Tikun is truly a profound matter, since in fact, the
Parsa too is a division of the degree on the Nikvey Eynaim that
extends from Tzimtzum NHY. However, there is a matter of “draws
from above and gives below” in it, as the Rav brought from the Zohar
(Part 6, item 9).
It means that there is a matter of ascent and descent in it. On the one
hand, it is the Rakia that separates between the Male Mayim Elyonim,
and the Female Mayim Tachtonim. This is done by force of the
division of each degree, bringing Bina and ZON outside, turning Keter
and Hochma of the degree into Male Mayim Elyonim. Bina and ZON
of the degree were separated and departed as Female Mayim
Tachtonim, which is the reason that Parsa is called a “Separating
Rakia”.
On the other hand, there is a matter of drawing from above and giving
below in her, meaning by the Zivug Elyon de AB SAG, the lower Hey
descends from the Eynaim to the place of Peh de Rosh, and then the
Parsa splits. It means that the difference between Keter and Hochma,
to Bina and ZON, is canceled because they return to their degree as
before (see Ohr Pnimi item 12).
15. This Tikun of the return of Bina and ZON to the degree is named only
after Parsa. However, this was done only because of the Zivug de AB
and SAG, and how would Parsa help in that, to merit this Tikun being
named after it?
The thing is that anything that manifests does not change after its
emanation. Hence, after the lower Hey came in the Nikvey Eynaim
once, she never descends from there again. Thus, a second Rosh was
erected for the matter of the ascent and the descent of the lower Hey
from the Nikvey Eynaim, which receives from the first Rosh.

--- PAGE 335 ---
Thus, the lower Hey in the Nikvey Eynaim of the second Rosh is in
Behinat ascending and descending. Also, that difference in the Nikvey
Eynaim of the second Rosh between the Keter and Hochma in it and
the Bina and ZON in it is called the Tikun of the Parsa, since it is in
Behinat ascending and descending.
This is so because only this is corrected in this way, in the lower Hey
descending to her place to Assiya and Bina and ZON that departed
from all the degrees returning. However, the difference that was made
in the Nikvey Eynaim of the first Rosh, called YESHSUT, is never
canceled with respect to the Bina and ZON that departed from it. This
is because there it is considered the beginning of Atzilut, which is not
subject to change.
Besides the above there is yet another special Tikun in Parsa: it hides
and conceals the force of the lower Hey in the Nikvey Eynaim of the
first Rosh, so it does not bestow below when the AHP return to the
Rosh. Had it not poured down to the second Rosh, the lower Hey of
the second Rosh would have been unable to descend from the Nikvey
Eynaim to Peh. This is because the force of the Elyon always
dominates its Tachton. However, the Parsa conceals it, and its power
is not dispensed below at that time, and remember that.
From the above you will understand the differentiation between
HaVaYaH de AB and HaVaYaH de SAG. As HaVaYaH de AB is
fulfilled with Yodin, so HaVaYaH de SAG is fulfilled with Yodin. The
only difference between them is in the fulfillment inside the Vav: the
filling of the Vav de HaVaYaH de SAG is with Aleph, like this: ׀א׀.
This is so because the meaning of the Tzura of the Aleph is explained
regarding the Tikun of the Parsa: its Tzura consists of two Yodin, an
upper Yod and a lower Yod, with an inclined Kav, which is the Parsa,
diagonally separating between them. This implies the division of the
degree that occurred because of Tzimtzum NHY and the ascent to the
Nikvey Eynaim. The upper Yod is Behinat Keter and Hochma of the
degree from Nikvey Eynaim up, called Male Mayim Elyonim.

--- PAGE 336 ---
The lower Yod is the Bina and ZON of the degree from Nikvey Eynaim
down, which departed from it, called Female Mayim Tachtonim. The
Parsa between these Yodin is the Rakia that separates between waters
and waters. This matter is discerned as the association of Midat ha
Rachamim with Din, which is the first beginning of the Olamot.
Hence the Aleph is the Rosh and the beginning of the twenty-two Otiot
from which the Olamot were created.
16. It has been clarified that the Tikun of the Parsa is not in the first Rosh,
which is YESHSUT from the Tabur up, but in the second Rosh, which
is from Tabur down. In the Pnimiut they are NHY de AK, and in
Hitzoniut they are the GAR de Nekudim, the place of MA and BON de
AK, which the Vav of the Name HaVaYaH implies.
Hence, in the YH de HaVaYaH de SAG, which are from Tabur up,
there is no issue of Parsa and lower Hey there. They are equal to
Partzuf AB, filled with Yodin equally with Partzuf AB. However, the
Vav de HaVaYaH de SAG from Tabur down is filled with Aleph, for
there is the place of the Tikun of the Parsa and the division to Mayim
Elyonim and Mayim Tachtonim.
Know, that because of that, HaVaYaH de MA is found to be filling all
four Otiot with filling of Alephin. This is because it was primarily
emanated in the form of the Parsa and the association of the lower
Hey (Histaklut Pnimit here, item 6).
However, in HaVaYaH de AB there is no fulfillment with Aleph
whatsoever, because the entire differentiation between AB and SAG
refers to the association with the lower Hey performed in Partzuf SAG,
not in Partzuf AB. Even in the SAG the connection is unapparent, but
only from Tabur down in its ZA, and not from the Tabur up.
17. Now you can understand the matter of the Zivug de AB and SAG by
which the lower Hey descends from the Nikvey Eynaim and returns to
her place as in the beginning. You already know that the Rosh of the
SAG clothes the HGT de AB from Chazeh de AB to its Peh, since it is
its Behinat Hitpashtut Bet, as written in the previous parts.

--- PAGE 337 ---
After the AB dispenses its Orot to the SAG, and since the Ohr de AB
hasn’t any Behinat Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, when Orot AB come in
SAG they lower the Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey Eynaim de SAG to the
place of the Peh too, being her real place, as she is in AB.
Below, in Olam ha Tikun, this Zivug is performed by the ascent of
MAN from the Tachtonim. Here, however, there is still no conduct of
raising MAN, but the Zivug is done by itself, namely by SAG’s suction
of sufficient amount of Orot de AB. These Orot lower the lower Hey to
her real place.
18. After the above-mentioned Zivug de AB SAG is performed, two
operations occur: one in Pnimiut AK, meaning the inner ZON from its
Tabur down, and one in Hitzoniut AK, meaning in GAR de Nekudim
clothing without, from Tabur down. This is because in Hitzoniut AK,
the Keter de Nekudim lowers its NHY and clothes them to Mochin in
Hochma and Bina de Nekudim.
It means that it lowers the lower Hey from its Nikvey Eynaim,
separating it from the HB de Nekudim, which took them out to Behinat
Guf. Now it lowered the lower Hey to her real place, to Peh de
Nekudim, as a Kamatz under the Otiot YHV (see Histaklut Pnimit here,
item 12), and the YHV that were as HGT returned and became Behinat
HBD, meaning Behinat GAR and Rosh.
However, this is enough only for Behinat HB de Nekudim themselves,
but no He’arah extends to ZAT de Nekudim any longer, because these
HB have nothing of Behinat lower Hey. Hence, they have no
connection to the ZON that are incorporated of the lower Hey, as he
wrote there in item 12, and item 9 here.
The second act extended from the above-mentioned Zivug de AB and
SAG to the inner ZON de AK below its Tabur. This is because this Ohr
descended and fissured that Parsa in Pnimiut de AK that separates the
inner ZON and brings them outside the Atzilut of SAG. Now it is
canceled and Ohr SAG returns and expands to the inner ZON as before
the Tzimtzum NHY, meaning through Sium Raglin de AK.

--- PAGE 338 ---
This is so because then Bina and ZA and Malchut too, which came
outside NHY de AK, and became the three Olamot Beria Yetzira
Assiya, have now returned to Behinat Atzilut, meaning NHY de AK, as
in the beginning. Now you can understand the Rav’s words above,
who says that the Parsa is a Tikun for the purpose of Beria, mentioned
in item 14. It is so because through the Tikun of ascent and descent in
the Parsa, Beria Yetzira and Assiya were returned to NHY de AK, and
returned to Behinat Atzilut.
19. Since GAR de Nekudim clothe NHY de AK, here too there is a Zivug of
NHY de AK with the HB de Nekudim, as in AB and SAG. It dispenses
them the Ohr of the Melafom, being the Vav with the Nekuda, which
means that it is Behinat lower Hey that shines inside the Otiot de YHV.
The lower Hey is called Nekuda and Behinat Peh de Nekudim is the
Vav, which the Nekuda comes inside the Vav, incorporated in the Vav
of the HB.
Before they received the Melafom from NHY de AK, they could not
dispense ZAT anything because they were not mingled with the lower
Hey (see item 9). This is because the lower Hey remained in the
Nikvey Eynaim, meaning NHY de Keter of the Nekudim and YHV,
which means a lack, for the lower Hey descended to HB, being AHP
de Keter.
However, now that the Vav of the YHV received the lower Hey, being
the Nekuda inside the Melafom, from Yesod de AK, and Hochma and
Bina mingled with the lower Hey. Also, HB returned and mated on
her, meaning extended Ohr Elyon on that Masach mixed with the
lower Hey, and extended Komat Keter. This Ohr returned and poured
also from above downward to the ZAT, to Behinat Guf, as it is written
in its place, in Part 7.
This is the fourth step that the lower Hey made, meaning when she
came inside the Otiot de YHV, which are HB de Nekudim, as a Nekuda
inside the Vav. From here she can expand into the Guf de Nekudim,
called the “seven lower Sefirot de Nekudim”.

--- PAGE 339 ---
Delve deep into the matter of these four steps that the lower Hey made
from the time of her connection with the First Hey inside the Kelim of
the inner NHY de AK, until she came inside the Otiot, being the Kelim
de HB de Nekudim. From there she could come to her place, meaning
ZAT de Nekudim.
This is because she made the first step from NHY de AK to Nikvey
Eynaim as Holam. There are three degrees in this step: the first in
Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh de SAG; the second, in Nikvey Eynaim of
YESHSUT, being the place of the Tabur; the third, in Nikvey Eynaim
de Keter de Nekudim.
In all of these, she was as Holam above the Otiot YHV, meaning as
lower Hey in the Eynaim and YHV in the AHP. In this Behina there
were the YHV, which are the AHP, completely clean from the lower
Hey (see item 10).
She made the second step from the Nikvey Eynaim de Keter Nekudim
to Peh de Nekudim as Kamatz under the Otiot de YHV. By that the HB
returned to Behinat Rosh because YHV that were in Behinat HGT
departed and came to Behinat HBD de Rosh. They are still clean of
lower Hey since she is below them as Kamatz.
She made the third step by the Zivug of Yesod de AK, at which time
she came to receive inside the Kelim de HB, meaning inside Otiot
YHV. Through the Zivug de AVI she descends to her place to ZON de
Nekudim, and this is the fourth step.
Know, that this fourth step is called Psia le Bar (lit. Stepping
Outside). It means that here she stepped outside of Atzilut because the
Kelim of the seven lower Sefirot, where the lower Hey expanded,
illuminate outside Atzilut first by the force of the He’arat Yesod de AK
that returned the BYA to Atzilut.
However, the ZAT could not exist like that, and their BYA returned,
departed and were separated from Atzilut. This is called “the breaking
of the vessels”, and for that reason this last step is called Psia le Bar.

--- PAGE 340 ---
We have explained two Psi’ot (pl. for Psia) in the Behinat Holam
itself (item 10 above). This is because there is Behinat Holam that
does not have Tikun of the Parsa, meaning it can expand under the
Otiot, which is the lower Hey in the Nikvey Eynaim de YESHSUT.
Also, there is Behinat Holam that does have the matter of ascent and
descent, which is the lower Hey in Nikvey Eynaim de Keter de
Nekudim. We considered them two Psi’ot, so there are five Psi’ot
here: four Psi’ot until it comes inside the Kelim de HB, and one Psia
le Bar.
20. We must thoroughly understand the difference between the two
Behinot in the above-mentioned Holam. The Behinat lower Hey in the
Nikvey Eynaim on the first Rosh does not descend form her place any
longer and the lower Hey of the second Rosh, which is the Keter de
Nekudim, descends below through the Zivug of AB and SAG.
The reason for it is that it’s been explained above (here, item 15) that
the primary Tikun in Parsa is to conceal and hide the force of the
lower Hey found in the Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh de Elyon when the
lower Hey de Rosh de Tachton descends to the place of the Peh.
The matter of this Tikun will not be portrayed in the first Rosh itself,
since there, in the place of her first creation, the lower Hey is in
association with the First Hey. Had she descended from there, she
would have had no way of ascending any longer. Moreover, the whole
issue of the Parsa is nothing but an upshot of this lower Hey that rose
to Nikvey Eynaim of the first Rosh.
Hence, she cannot descend from her place, as there is no one to
conceal her force. However, after the Parsa is born under the first
Rosh, and the AHP that went outside the First Rosh also divided into
GE and AHP by themselves, it became possible for the lower Hey to
descend from these Nikvey Eynaim of that Rosh.
This is because the Parsa conceals the First Hey in the Nikvey Eynaim
of the first Rosh in a way that the primary association of Midat ha
Rachamim with Din, is made in Nikvey Eynaim of the First Rosh into a
fixed, existing Shoresh. However, the Parsa can conceal her force on

--- PAGE 341 ---
occasion, not permanently. This act of association, meaning the above-
mentioned ascent and descent is placed in the second Rosh.
21. You should also remember the need for two Behinot Zivugim made in
Hochma and Bina de Nekudim that were explained above. They are
the matter of Hitlabshut NHY de Keter Nekudim to Mochin in HB, and
the matter of the He’arat Yesod de AK of the point to Shuruk to HB de
Nekudim.
This is because the Zivug de NHY de Keter helped only HB, meaning
the Behinat Rosh de Nekudim, as by the descent of the lower Hey to
the place of the Peh, the HB returned to Behinat Rosh. However, that
did not help at all to the Behinat Guf de Nekudim, being the seven
lower Sefirot, as it is written in item 10.
Thus, the He’arah of the inner NHY de AK was necessitated, being
Behinat lower Hey in and of themselves (see Ohr Pnimi item 7). After
the HB received the He’arat lower Hey from Yesod, as Vav with the
Nekuda inside it, meaning the lower Hey, because the Nekuda came
inside the Kelim de HB, that Ohr is the core of ZAT that came to Bina
de Nekudim. She procreated them and they came down to their place.
22. We must still clarify, that it is known that any Partzuf Tachton clothes
its Elyon from Peh de Rosh down, as it is thoroughly written in the
previous Partzufim de AK. Thus, why doesn’t that Partzuf de
Nekudim, emanated from Partzuf SAG, clothe it whatsoever? After all,
Keter de Nekudim begins below the Sium of the entire Partzuf de SAG,
but it clothes the NHY of the first Partzuf de AK, called Partzuf
Galgalta de AK.
We must also ask: what happens with the Reshimot de Taamim de SAG
that remained after the Histalkut of these Orot? After all, all the Orot
de Guf depart and rise to their Maatzil because of the Hizdakchut of
the Masach.
What is even more perplexing, where does the fulfillment to the Guf
de SAG from Tabur up to the Peh come from after the Histalkut of the
Ohr from there? In all the Partzufim the Tachton fills and clothes to its
Guf de Elyon after its Histalkut. However, the Partzuf Nekudim

--- PAGE 342 ---
doesn’t clothe its Elyon, being SAG, as it stands below its Sium
Raglin. Thus, who fulfills it after the Histalkut of its Orot to the
Maatzil?
To understand that we must be precise with the Rav’s words here (Part
6, item 17). He writes, “all the Ohr extending through Tabur,
though it is from Behinat Eynaim, is all swallowed and
incorporated in Akudim, hence becoming indistinguishable.
However, only the Ohr that extends below Tabur to its Raglaim is
called Nekudot, as now it stands alone.”
This we must understand: why is the Ohr from Behinat Eynaim, being
Ne’etzal from Partzuf SAG, swallowed and mingled in Akudim de
SAG and is unapparent whatsoever through the Tabur? After all, any
Partzuf Tachton clothes the Elyon above Tabur too. Also, it is still
quite apparent, and is not contained in it and swallowed in it.
23. Here you must remember all the elements in the creation order of a
Partzuf Tachton from the Elyon, explained in the previous parts. We
will mention just a few:
The primary factor in the birth of a Partzuf is the Hizdakchut of the
Masach until it equalizes with the Maatzil. By that it raises all the
Reshimot de Sefirot Guf to the Maatzil, which remain after the
Histalkut Orot de Guf. There the Masach mingles with them in the
Masach de Malchut de Rosh, called Maatzil, and then the Reshimot
are renewed by the Zivug Elyon de Rosh.
When the Aviut in their Guf is recognized, they must exit the Behinat
Rosh and return to Behinat Guf as they were in the beginning.
However, not to Behinat Tabur de Elyon as they first were, but one
Behina higher than the Tabur de Elyon. This is because the last Behina
always disappears during the Hizdakchut, until it leaves no Reshimo.
The Tabur de Elyon is always the last Behina to disappear. Hence its
corresponding Behina in the Guf de Elyon is found to be one degree
above the Tabur de Elyon. This is the conduct in all the Partzufim,
(see above Part 4, Table of Topics, item 210).

--- PAGE 343 ---
Partzuf Nekudim, which is MA and BON de AK, emanates from its
Elyon, being Partzuf SAG de AK, according to the above order. By the
Hizdakchut of the Masach de Guf de Partzuf SAG de AK, it equalized
its Tzura with the Maatzil, being Malchut de Rosh SAG, and raised all
the Reshimot that the Orot left after their Histalkut from the Guf to the
Maatzil.
After their renewal there in Zivug de Rosh, and after their Aviut had
been recognized, they came out of the Rosh and descended to their
corresponding Behina in the Guf, being one degree above Tabur de
SAG. That place is called Chazeh de SAG, and from the Chazeh up
emerged the Eser Sefirot de Rosh by a Zivug with the Ohr Elyon.
From the Chazeh de SAG down the Eser Sefirot de Guf came out in
Toch and Sof through Tabur, meaning through Sium Raglin de SAG,
and this is the order in all the Partzufim.
24. It is known that this Masach de Guf SAG purified and rose to Malchut
de Rosh SAG, meaning to Nikvey Eynaim, to Behina Aleph de Rosh. It
also contains all the Reshimot that remained from Orot de ZON de AK
ha Pnimi after the Histalkut of their Orot from them (see Ohr Pnimi
item 1).
It turns out that in this Hizdakchut Masach de Guf de SAG there is a
great difference from all the Partzufim, as it consists of two Behinot
Reshimot from two separate Partzufim: the first is the Reshimot that
remain from the ZON de Partzuf Galgalta de AK. These are distant
from one another because the Reshimot of itself come from Masach de
Behina Bet, and the Reshimot of ZON de AK ha Pnimi come from
Masach de Behina Dalet.
Hence, when they were mingled with the Masach and rose to the
Zivug de Elyon in Rosh de SAG, two kinds of Zivugim came out on
them: the first on its own Reshimot, from which the Ohr Eynaim that
expanded to Tabur came out (here item 22). He says about it that it
was swallowed and incorporated in Akudim and is unapparent, and its
order of Halbasha is as mentioned above. This is because after its
Aviut had been recognized, and the Masach descended from Rosh to

--- PAGE 344 ---
Chazeh, it generated Eser Sefirot de Rosh from the Chazeh to Peh de
SAG, and Eser Sefirot de Guf from the Chazeh down to the Sium
Raglin of SAG, meaning the place of Tabur de AK.
The second Zivug was made on the Reshimot incorporated from
Behina Dalet, meaning Ohr de Nekudot de SAG that clothed that ZON
de Partzuf Galgalta de AK. The Behina Dalet connected in them there
(Ohr Pnimi item 6), and this is the Ohr that descended from the
Eynaim and expanded below Tabur de AK. The Rav says about it that
only it is named “Nekudot” because it came out in Behinat lower Hey
in the Eynaim and YHV in the AHP.
25. Indeed, the above division of the two Partzufim from Tabur up and
from Tabur down has been rooted in Partzuf SAG itself even before its
Histalkut. This is because then too the Rav states (Part 6, item 6) that
it divides by Taamim and Nekudot. The Taamim de SAG are that part
of SAG that is not mixed with the inner MA and BON, which he
compares to AVI, extending through Tabur de AK. The Nekudot de
SAG are that part of SAG that clothed and connected in the inner MA
and BON, which he compares to YESHSUT, beginning from Tabur
down.
Thus, back in Partzuf SAG before the Histalkut of its Orot, two
separate Partzufim have been rooted in it, by the force of the
connection with the Behina Dalet of the inner MA and BON. Its
Partzuf Elyon is called Taamim, being Behinat AVI, and its Partzuf
Tachton is called Behinat YESHSUT, called Nekudot.
Thus we have learned that the outer Partzuf MA and BON de AK,
emanated from the outer Partzuf SAG de AK is divided into two
Partzufim: the Elyon through Tabur, and the Tachton from Tabur
down. When you regard both as one Partzuf, like the Taamim and
Nekudot de SAG, then the Elyon will be considered GAR, and the
Tachton as VAK, which are as AVI to ZON de Atzilut.
26. Now you can understand what is presented in several places, that GAR
de ZA remain in Ima during its Atzilut, and do not depart with it. It has

--- PAGE 345 ---
been explained above (here item 8) that Olam ha Nekudim is the first
ZON that appears in the Olamot, meaning MA and BON.
It also explains that the core of MA and BON is its connection with the
Behina Dalet (here item 6). It is always emanated from Partzuf SAG,
meaning Partzuf Bina, because as it is here, so it is in all the Olamot.
Hence, SAG is called Ima, since she is the Maatzil of ZON, meaning
MA and BON.
In the first MA and BON you find that the Ne’etzal from the SAG de
AK had to come out in two Partzufim: Partzuf GAR from Peh de SAG
to Tabur, not incorporated with the lower Hey, and Partzuf VAK from
Tabur down, incorporated in the lower Hey.
The Partzuf Elyon above Tabur was mixed and swallowed in Akudim
de SAG because it hasn’t any of the Behinat Nekudim, meaning the
connection with the lower Hey. Only the Partzuf from Tabur down is
considered Partzuf Nekudim, meaning MA and BON. Thus, the GAR
de MA and BON remain and are swallowed in Guf de Ima, meaning
the SAG, and do not leave with the MA and BON.
In other words, they do not connect with them whatsoever since they
are an entirely separated Partzuf, as the Rav says, that the Ohr from
Peh to Tabur is swallowed and incorporated in Akudim de SAG.
It is known that all the forces in the Elyon must be in all its Tachtonim.
Hence, the matter of the division of MA and BON into two Partzufim
GAR and VAK that appeared in the first MA and BON, applies in all
the Partzufim de MA and BON from here on. The GAR remains
adhesive and is swallowed in its Maatzil, meaning Ima, and only the
VAK come out with the name MA and BON.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 346 ---
Cause and Consequence
We shall now explain the order of all the operations made in the
Olamot through cause and consequence thus far, meaning how every
operation is necessarily generated in all its conditions by its original
cause.
1. We shall begin with Olam ha Tzimtzum. The Tzimtzum was primarily
on Behina Dalet, which is Behinat Malchut de Ein Sof, called the
“Middle Point”. However, the Histalkut of the Ohr was from all Eser
Sefirot, and these Reshimot that the Ohr left after its Histalkut are
called Eser Sefirot de Igulim.
Afterwards a Masach was erected in the Malchut of the Eser Sefirot
de Igulim and the Ohr Elyon expanded once more, until it struck that
Masach in Kli Malchut. From the Hakaa of the Ohr Elyon in the
Masach, a great Ohr appeared, called Ohr Hozer.
This Ohr Hozer rose and clothed the Ohr Elyon up to Keter, from
below upward, and those Eser Sefirot are called the Rosh of the Kav.
After that the Ohr Hozer expanded once more with the Ohr Elyon
inside it from above downward, in the same amount it clothed from
below upward before in the Rosh of the Kav.
That Hitpashtut from above downward is called Toch and Sof of the
Kav, and these Rosh, Toch, Sof of the Kav are called “the first Partzuf
of Adam Kadmon”, or “Partzuf Galgalta de AK”.
2. Thus we have before us ten operations:
1. The place where the Tzimtzum occurred.
2. The Eser Sefirot that the Reshimot laid called Eser Sefirot de
Igulim.
3. Eser Sefirot called Igulim.

--- PAGE 347 ---
4. The Masach in Kli Malchut.
5. Hitpashtut Ohr Elyon once more.
6. Zivug de Hakaa of the Ohr Elyon with the Masach.
7. Ohr Hozer that becomes a Levush and Behinat reception for the
Ohr Elyon.
8. Eser Sefirot de Yosher, the Rosh of the Kav.
9. Hitpashtut of the Malchut with the Ohr Hozer into Eser Sefirot
from above downward. The first nine Sefirot of those Eser Sefirot
are called “the Toch of the Kav”, and the Malchut of those Eser
Sefirot is called “the Sof of the Kav”.
10. Nekudot ha Sium of the Kav. From there down it is darkness and
not Ohr.
3. Now we shall explain the connections of cause and consequence
among them: First, the place where the Tzimtzum is made is caused by
the Histalkut Ohr Ein Sof from there. Thus, the first thing to know is
that there is no absence in the spiritual. Hence, any slight change in
the spiritual does not mean that the first Tzura is absent from its place,
as in corporeality. Rather, it means that the first Tzura remains in its
place unchanged in any way, and the change in the Tzura refers to an
addition to the previous Tzura. Thus, now there are to forms instead of
one.
We must also remember that the law of separation in the spiritual is
nothing more than the disparity of Tzura. As the ax separates in the
corporeal, so disparity of Tzura separates in the spiritual. Thus, if the
spiritual acquires some change within, it divides and becomes two.
The distance between them is as the measure of the difference of form
between them. If it is a slight difference, they are still considered
close, but if the disparity is great, they are considered far from one
another.
4. The reason for the Tzimtzum and the Histalkut Ohr is that Malchut de
Ein Sof, which is Behina Dalet, wanted a more complete Hishtavut
Tzura with the Ohr Elyon, as explained above in Part 1 Ohr Pnimi and

--- PAGE 348 ---
Histaklut Pnimit. It explains there that there was not even a slight
change made in Ein Sof itself by the Tzimtzum that was made, but that
this Olam Tzimtzum is only an addition, renewed over the Ohr Ein Sof.
The thing is that Malchut de Ein Sof wanted greater Dvekut. Hence, a
change of form occurred in her, for that yearning did not manifest in
her in Ein Sof. Thus, it is considered that a new Tzura was added here,
and she departed from Malchut de Ein Sof, and acquired her own
name, which is Behinat Keter de Olam ha Tzimtzum.
This Keter itself expanded into four Behinot, and when Behina Dalet
in it appeared, wanting greater Hishtavut Tzura with the Ohr Elyon,
she diminished the will to receive in her and all the Ohr that was there
immediately departed. This is because the entire vessel of reception in
the spirituals is the will to receive. Without the will to receive there is
no Ohr, because coercion applies only in the corporeal, of course.
Thus we have explained the operations, which are the place where the
Tzimtzum was made and the Eser Sefirot that the Reshimot made into
Eser Kelim de Igulim left. The yearning for equivalence of form in
Malchut de Ein Sof activated both of them together, meaning the
Hitpashtut Ohr and its Histalkut from there.
From them came the third act, the ten Kelim de Igulim, because these
Reshimot that remain after the Histalkut are the Igulim. Thus, these
three acts are necessary and stem from one another.
5. The fourth act is the Masach in Kli Malchut de Igulim extending by
the Histalkut Ohr from all four Behinot. This is because the Tzimtzum
was only on Behina Dalet while the Histalkut was from all Eser
Sefirot, for at that time, Behina Dalet was the entire receptacle for the
Ohr.
Thus, there immediately awakened in her a Ratzon to extend the Ohr
over only the first three Behinot, and not on Behina Dalet, for she
couldn’t tolerate the darkness. Because of the manifestation of that
Ratzon, the fundamental Gevul was elicited and born in the Olamot, as
it says, “Thus far shalt thou come, but no further.”

--- PAGE 349 ---
This refers to the limitation on receiving only in the first three
Behinot. This form of reception is called “Tikun Masach in Kli
Malchut”. It extended by the Hamshacha of Ohr from the Maatzil
once more after the Tzimtzum.
Thus the fourth act and the fifth act have been explained. They are:
Masach in Kli Malchut, and the Hitpashtut of the Ohr Elyon once
more. This is because the Histalkut Ohr activated both the Masach
and the Hamshacha of Ohr Elyon once more, on the first three
Behinot, for she couldn’t tolerate the darkness.
6. The sixth operation is the Zivug de Hakaa of the Ohr Elyon with the
Masach, extending by the force of the Ohr Elyon itself. The Tzimtzum
and the Masach made on Behina Dalet came out by the force of the
Ne’etzal itself, and the Ohr Elyon extending from Ein Sof that filled
the entire reality there without any Gevul does not tolerate the Gevul
imprinted in the Masach.
Quite the contrary, it wants to come into Behina Dalet as well, and fill
the entire reality as is its custom, but the Masach pushes it back by the
force of its Gevul. This is called Zivug de Hakaa. Thus, the Zivug de
Hakaa extends from the Ohr Elyon itself.
7. The seventh operation is that the Ohr Hozer, which becomes a Levush
and receptacle for the Ohr Elyon, extends by the force of the Hakaa of
the Masach in the Ohr Elyon, to the extent that it pushes it back. This
is because that full measure of the Ohr Elyon that was fitting to come
in Behina Dalet and did not come there because of its detainment on
the Masach that pushed it back, is called Ohr Hozer.
Thus, the Ohr Hozer extends from the Hakaa of the Masach on the
Ohr Elyon. Remember, that from the Tzimtzum onward, from the time
Behina Dalet stopped being a receptacle for the Ohr Elyon, the Ohr
Hozer took its place. In other words, the Ohr Hozer became the vessel
of reception instead of Behina Dalet before. Other than that, there is
no vessel of reception.
8. The eighth operation is the Eser Sefirot de Yosher in Behinat Rosh of
the Kav. It extends by the Histalkut of the Ohr during the Tzimtzum

--- PAGE 350 ---
(see item 5), for it is the fifth operation. However, they do not connect
and clothe to be Shorashim to the Partzuf except through the Ohr
Hozer in the above-mentioned seventh operation, relating to its
Halbasha on them from below upward.
9. The ninth operation is the Hitpashtut of Malchut with the Ohr Hozer
in her from above downward into Toch and Sof. It extends from the
Masach in Malchut of the Rosh.
She is considered moving from “potential to actual” because the same
measure of rejection and measure of Hitlabshut that emanated by the
force of the Masach in the Eser Sefirot de Rosh, were only in
“potential”. In fact, there are neither rejection nor Hitlabshut there.
Rather, everything that is done in the Eser Sefirot de Rosh in potential
manifests later in the Toch and Sof, called Guf, in actual fact.
The measure of the Ohr that the Ohr Hozer clothed in the Rosh in
“potential”, in that same measure the Ohr Elyon is found to clothe in
the Guf de facto. This Hitlabshut is called “the Toch of the Guf” from
Peh to Tabur.
The Behinot Sium that the Masach made in the Eser Sefirot de Rosh in
potential, meaning the Behinat Hakaa it made on the Ohr Elyon not
letting it expand into Behina Dalet appears in the Guf de facto, from
Tabur down to Sium Raglin. This is called the Sof part of the Partzuf.
Thus, from Sium Raglin of the Partzuf downward, the middle point
appears in actual fact, as the Masach stops the Ohr Elyon there
altogether, and leaves a vacant Halal without Ohr. Hence, the Behinat
Toch of the Guf is considered the position of the first nine Sefirot, and
the Behinat Sof of the Guf is regarded as Sefirat Malchut alone,
meaning the Behinat limitation and power of Sium in her.
Thus the ninth operation and the tenth operation have been explained.
These are the Hitpashtut Malchut from above downward to Toch and
Sof, called Guf, and the point of the Sium of the Kav, under which it is
darkness and not Ohr, both activated by the Masach de Rosh.

--- PAGE 351 ---
10. Thus the cause and consequence through the elicitation of Partzuf ha
Aleph de AK has been explained, called Partzuf Galgalta de AK. Now
we shall explain the elicitation of the five Partzufim de AK from one
another by way of cause and consequence.
First we shall explain the causes for the birth of a Partzuf in general,
meaning as it is in all the Partzufim equally, and then we will explain
the particular Partzufim.
The first cause in the birth of a Partzuf is the Bitush de Ohr Makif and
Ohr Pnimi on one another, by which the Masach de Guf of the Partzuf
purifies and becomes as Zach as the Masach in Malchut de Rosh. This
is considered ascending and mingling in the Zivug Elyon de Rosh,
along with the Reshimot de Eser Sefirot de Guf contained in it.
Its two Upper Reshimot, called Zachar and Nekeva, generate two
kinds of Zivugim in the Masach de Rosh. Through this Hitkalelut, the
Masach and the Reshimot renew, until it becomes apparent that its
Shoresh is from the Aviut de Guf, except the last Behina, which
disappears from them.
Then they descend to the Guf once more, in its Hitzoniut, to the place
of the Chazeh, and the Ohr Elyon expands in Zivug de Hakaa on this
Masach, raising Ohr Hozer from the Masach upward. It extends Eser
Sefirot de Rosh, whose Koma reaches the Peh of the previous Partzuf.
After that Malchut expands from the Chazeh downward with the Ohr
Hozer in her into Eser Sefirot de Guf in Toch and Sof. These Rosh,
Toch, Sof are considered an upshot, a son to the former Partzuf,
clothing it from Peh de Rosh through its Sium.
11. Thus there are fourteen operations before us:
1. Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi.
2. Hizdakchut of the Masach.
3. Hitkalelut of the Masach in Reshimot de Eser Sefirot de Guf.
4. Two Upper Reshimot: Zachar and Nekeva.
5. Two kinds of Zivugim in the Masach of the Rosh.

--- PAGE 352 ---
6. Renewal of the Aviut in the Masach and the Reshimot.
7. The manifestation of the Aviut de Guf in them.
8. The concealment of the Reshimo of the last Behina in them.
9. Their exit from the Rosh.
10. Their arrival at the Hitzoniut of the Guf of the previous Partzuf in
the place of the Chazeh.
11. Zivug de Hakaa performed on the Masach in the place of the
Chazeh extending Eser Sefirot de Rosh.
12. Hitpashtut of the Malchut de Rosh from the Chazeh down to
Behinat Guf in Toch and Sof.
13. Clothing the previous Partzuf.
14. Its Koma begins from the Peh of the previous Partzuf.
12. Now we shall explain the cause and consequence connections in them.
The first operation is the Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi extending
from the Masach. To the extent that the Masach extends and clothes
the Ohr Pnimi in the Partzuf, it rejects the Ohr Makif that belongs to
the Partzuf.
This is so because its ability to clothe the Ohr Elyon comes entirely by
its Hakaa on the Ohr Elyon that pushes the full measure of Ohr that
should expand in Behina Dalet back, not letting it expand in the
Partzuf from its Tabur down. It is known that this Ohr that cannot
clothe in the Partzuf is the Ohr Makif of the Partzuf.
Hence, the Ohr Pnimi and Ohr Makif are found to be contradicting
one another because the measure of the clothing Ohr Pnimi is as the
measure of Aviut of the Masach. Conversely, the measure of the Ohr
Makif depends on the Zakut of the Kelim.
Thus, the Ohr Makif purifies the Masach and the Ohr Pnimi departs
from the Partzuf. For that reason the Masach is the reason for the
Bitush de Ohr Makif in the Ohr Pnimi.
13. The second operation, which is the Hizdakchut of the Masach, extends
from the Bitush de Ohr Makif in the Ohr Pnimi, as in the first

--- PAGE 353 ---
operation.
The third operation, being the Hitkalelut of the Masach in the
Reshimot de Eser Sefirot de Guf, comes together with the Hizdakchut
of the Masach extending from the Bitush de Ohr Makif in the Ohr
Pnimi. Since the Masach is purified gradually, according to the
Sefirot, it passes and comes within each and every one, mingling with
it during its ascent.
When it purifies into Behina Gimel it comes and mingles in Sefirat
ZA, and when it purifies into Behina Bet, it comes and mingles in Bina
etc. similarly. Finally, it comes to the Maatzil and mingles with all.
14. The fourth operation, which is the two Upper Reshimot Zachar and
Nekeva, extends by the force of the concealment of the last Behina
because of the Hizdakchut in each and every Partzuf.
For example: after the Hizdakchut of Partzuf Galgalta, Behina Dalet
disappears, and after the Hizdakchut of Partzuf AB, Behina Gimel
disappears, etc. meaning precisely to that part of Aviut in her that
stands for Hamshacha and Hakaa. However, the part de Hitlabshut in
her does not disappear, and this is called the Zachar. It is unfit to mate
with the Ohr Elyon, except when it connects with its closest Behina
that has a complete Reshima, which is called its Nekeva.
For instance, after the Hizdakchut of Partzuf Galgalta, the last Behina
remains with only half of the Reshimo of Behina Dalet, meaning only
from Behinat Hitlabshut, called the Zachar. In order to mate with the
Ohr Elyon, it must connect with the Behina Gimel, which becomes its
Nekeva, and then it can mate with the Ohr Elyon. Thus, the matter of
Zachar and Nekeva appears because of the concealment of the last
Behina of each Partzuf after its Hizdakchut.
15. The fifth operation is two kinds of Zivugim in the Masach de Rosh. It
comes together with the Zachar and Nekeva that were made by the
concealment of the last Behina. This is so because at first, the Nekeva
mingles with the Zachar, and by the Zivug with the Ohr Elyon they
extend Ohr in the Koma of the Zachar. From this Zivug it is still not

--- PAGE 354 ---
extended to Hitlabshut in the Kelim, due to the absence of Behinat
Hamshacha in the Zachar.
Hence, a second Zivug is needed, where the Zachar will be mixed
with the Nekeva, at which time Eser Sefirot at the Koma of the Nekeva
will be drawn. From this second Zivug the Ohr is qualified to clothe in
the Kelim. Thus, the two kinds of Zivugim made on the Zachar and
Nekeva in the Masach de Rosh extend because of the concealment of
the last Behina after the Hizdakchut of the Partzuf.
16. The sixth operation, which is the renewal of the Aviut in the Masach
and the Reshimot, extends by their unification in the Masach of the
Rosh, until they operate together with it in the Zivug de Hakaa on the
Ohr Elyon. This is because the Tachton that comes in the place of the
Elyon truly becomes one with it.
Thus, immediately as they come to the Rosh, they mingle with the
Aviut from below upward operating in the Rosh, hence their own Aviut
is renewed, meaning the Behinat “potential” Aviut, which is destined
to appear de facto and turn into Aviut from above downward.
17. The seventh operation is the recognition of the Aviut de Guf in the
Masach and the Reshimot that rose. It comes along with the renewal
of the Aviut that they have acquired during their unification with the
Masach of the Rosh.
With the renewal of their Aviut, the Behinat from above downward in
them immediately becomes apparent in the Reshimot, meaning the
Aviut de Guf that they have already used before the ascent.
In the beginning, before they purified from the Aviut in them, it was
not at all apparent that they are Sefirot de Guf, for they were
completely silent. Hence, they equalized with Behinat Rosh and rose
and united with the Masach de Rosh. However, after they acquired the
Behinat “potential” Aviut in the Masach de Rosh, and the Reshimot
were revived, along with it a certain measure of Aviut de Guf became
instantly apparent, imprinted in them since they were in the Guf. This
thing is considered Shinui Tzura with respect to Malchut de Rosh.

--- PAGE 355 ---
18. The eighth operation is the concealment of the Reshimo of the last
Behina in them. It extends by the force of the Bitush de Ohr Makif,
whose operation is discernible primarily on the last Behina, and no
Reshimo remains of her.
The ninth operation is their exit from the Rosh, extending by the
discerning of their Aviut (see item 17). This is considered Shinui Tzura
from Malchut de Rosh because the Shinui Tzura and the exit is the
same.
19. The tenth operation is their emergence to the Hitzoniut of the Guf of
the previous Partzuf at the place of the Chazeh, extending form the
concealment of the last Behina. For example, after the Hizdakchut of
Partzuf Galgalta de AK its Masach and Reshimot rose to the Rosh,
and their Aviut returned except for the last Behina. Thus, they have
only Behina Gimel of the Aviut de Guf that they had before the
purification, called Chazeh.
Behina Dalet is the last Behina to disappear from them because of the
purification. Hence, this Koma, which comes out on the Aviut de
Behina Gimel, is considered Hitzoniut over the previous Partzuf, as it
is known that the more Av is considered the more Pnimi, and more
Elyon. For this reason they are Hitzoniut to Partzuf Galgalta, which is
Behina Dalet.
20. The eleventh operation is the Zivug de Hakaa performed on the
Masach in the place of the Chazeh. It extends from the Hitkalelut of
the Masach in the Malchut de Rosh, which was incorporated and
acquired the Aviut of Behinat “potential” from Masach de Rosh (see
item 16).
It was compelled to descend from the Rosh because of the Aviut de
Guf discerned in the Reshimot that were incorporated in it. However, it
is still not enough for actual Aviut de Kelim, but only when it first
elicits Eser Sefirot de Rosh from below upward in “potential” through
the Zivug Elyon. Afterwards Malchut expands in Eser Sefirot from her
and within her from above downward in Behinat Kelim for actual
Hitlabshut in Toch and Sof.

--- PAGE 356 ---
Thus the eleventh operation has been clarified, which is the Zivug de
Hakaa. The twelfth operation is the Hitpashtut of Malchut de Rosh
from the Chazeh down to Behinat Guf in Toch and Sof. Both extend
from the ascent and Hitkalelut of the Masach in Malchut de Rosh.
21. The thirteenth operation is the clothing over the previous Partzuf,
extending and connected with the Histalkut Orot de Guf of the
previous Partzuf. This is because the new Partzuf fill the Kelim that
have been emptied of their Orot with its Ohr during the Hizdakchut of
the Masach and its ascent to the Rosh. It is considered that it clothes
with its new Orot.
22. The fourteenth operation is when its Koma begins from the Peh of the
previous Partzuf, extending by its birth and emergence from there, as
is the nature of the branch that is attached where it exits and sucks off
the Shoresh. Similarly, the entire Shoresh of the new Partzuf is from
the Hitkalelut of the Masach de Guf in the Malchut de Rosh, called
Peh. Hence its Koma is attached there, and from there it begins.
23. Thus we have explained the fourteen operations that cause the birth
and emanation of a Partzuf from Partzuf in general, as it is in all the
Partzufim equally; how each causes and is caused by its prior cause in
utter necessity. Now we shall explain the sequence of the five
Partzufim de AK by cause and consequence.
The ten operations that were made for the emanation of Partzuf
Galgalta de AK through cause and consequence have already been
explained (item 1). After Partzuf Galgalta had been completed, the
Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi began, and following it all the
above fourteen operations until Partzuf AB de AK emanated from it in
Rosh, Toch, Sof.
Thus, Peh de Partzuf AB is AB at the place of Chazeh de Partzuf
Galgalta, for Behina Dalet, called Tabur de Galgalta, was not
included in the Masach de AB, as it is the last Behina, which
disappears along with the Hizdakchut. Hence, the Eser Sefirot de Rosh
AB stand from the place of the Chazeh to the Peh de Partzuf Galgalta,
and its Sium Raglin is above Tabur de Galgalta, as it is Behina Dalet

--- PAGE 357 ---
there. Also, AB has nothing of Behina Dalet, hence it cannot expand
below Tabur de Galgalta.
24. After the Rosh, Toch, Sof de Partzuf AB is completed, the Bitush de
Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi also returns on it. This activates all fourteen
operations, until Partzuf SAG de AK is emanated from it in Rosh,
Toch, Sof, namely the third Partzuf de AK.
There too the Masach of its Rosh did not stand in the place of Tabur
de AB, meaning in Behina Gimel de Guf, which is Tabur for the AB,
but at its Chazeh. This is because the last Behina de AB is not included
in the Masach de SAG, as it disappears with the Hizdakchut of the
Masach.
From the Chazeh to Peh de AB stand the Eser Sefirot de Rosh SAG,
and from the Chazeh down the Eser Sefirot de Guf SAG come out in
Toch and Sof through the Sium Raglin of the first Partzuf de AK, called
Galgalta.
25. Here, in Partzuf SAG, two operations that weren’t in Partzuf AB were
added:
1. It extended below Tabur de Galgalta de AK as well, clothed and
illuminated in the Kelim de Galgalta de AK from Tabur downward.
2. It divided into two Partzufim on the Tabur de Galgalta de AK. From
Tabur upwards it is called AB de SAG, or Taamim de SAG, and from
Tabur de Galgalta downward, SAG is called SAG, MA, BON de SAG,
or Nekudot, Tagin, Otiot de SAG.
The first operation, meaning what extends below Tabur de Galgalta as
well, extends because there still wasn’t a Tzimtzum on the Ohr Bina,
obstructing it from illuminating to Behina Dalet. This is because
Tzimtzum Aleph was only on Ohr Hochma, hence Partzuf AB, whose
Koma is up to Hochma could not expand below Tabur de Galgalta,
the place of Behina Dalet. However, the Koma of Partzuf SAG is only
up to Bina, and thus it could shine also into Behina Dalet.
The second operation, meaning its division into Taamim and Nekudot,
extends from the first operation, from the force of the Zachar de

--- PAGE 358 ---
Partzuf SAG. The Zachar de SAG is Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut. In
the Zivug ha Aleph of the Rosh, it extended Komat Hochma, which
clothes the Kli de Keter de SAG (see Ohr Pnimi item 1).
Thus, Keter de SAG that extends through the Tabur is called AB de
SAG, or Taamim. However, the Ohr Zachar cannot expand below
Keter, therefore the rest of the lower nine Sefirot de SAG expand from
Tabur of Galgalta downwards. This is so because there is no Ohr
Hochma in them, but only Ohr Bina, upon which the Tzimtzum does
not apply. Thus, this part is called SAG de SAG, indicates that there is
nothing of AB there.
26. After the Rosh, Toch, Sof of Partzuf SAG were completed, the Bitush
de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi returned on it, and the rest of the fourteen
operations related to it. Finally, the fourth Partzuf de AK was
emanated from it, called MA and BON de AK. MA and BON too came
out in two separate Partzufim from one another on the Tabur de
Galgalta de AK, as Partzuf SAG, from which they extend.
However, there are several very important operations added in the
order of the emanation of Partzuf MA and BON. This is because they
implanted the matter of the association of Midat ha Rachamim with
Din, considered the beginning of the Olamot, as the Olamot would not
have existed whatsoever were it not for them.
The fundamental cause of all these additional operations is the
Hitpashtut of Nekudot de SAG from Tabur de AK downwards,
meaning into the Kelim de NHY de Galgalta, which are from Behina
Dalet. In this manner the SAG, being Behina Bet and the First Hey,
became cohesive with the NHY of Partzuf Galgalta, which are Behina
Dalet, the lower Hey de HaVaYaH.
This caused the Tzimtzum Bet in AK, as was the Tzimtzum Aleph in
Ein Sof (Part 6, item 7). As Tzimtzum Aleph was on Behina Dalet, so
here the Tzimtzum was made on Behina Bet. Also, Tzimtzum Aleph
pushed the Ohr away from all four Behinot, and then returned and
extended only the first nine Sefirot. Here too the Tzimtzum was made
on Behina Bet, pushed the Ohr from the entire Guf de SAG, and then

--- PAGE 359 ---
returned to clothe only the two Sefirot Keter and Hochma in the entire
Rosh, Toch, Sof in this Partzuf MA and BON.
In Tzimtzum Aleph the Kav of Ohr Ein Sof on Malchut de NHY de AK
stopped at the place of Olam ha Zeh, and remained without Ohr. Here
too, in Tzimtzum Bet, the Ohr stopped on the Kav from Ein Sof on
Bina de NHY de AK. Thus, Bina ZA and Malchut remained below the
point of Tzimtzum, without Ohr.
Know, that here is where Bina acquired the name Beria in all the
degrees, from the word “Bar” (lit. outside), such as “Batei Barai” (lit.
outskirts), meaning outwardly.
It is so because through Tzimtzum Bet here, Bina in all the degrees
went outside the degree. Thus, Bina of the Rosh became Behinat Guf;
Bina above Tabur became Behinat below Tabur; and Bina of the NHY
went completely outside the Atzilut of the Partzuf, remaining without
Ohr, like the Nekuda de Olam ha Zeh during Tzimtzum Aleph.
27. However, there is a great difference between the Tzimtzum here and
Tzimtzum Aleph, as there the Tzimtzum on Behina Dalet was absolute,
and can never change. However, here in Tzimtzum bet, it is not so
definite, and might change by a Zivug Elyon.
Hence, from here on there are two states in each Partzuf: a state of
Katnut, and a state of Gadlut. Consequently, two Roshim were erected
here: Rosh Aleph, where the two Heyin are connected to each other
permanently, which can never be separated. After that, a second Rosh
was erected, where their connection is not permanent, but ascends and
descends.
The Parsa was set up between them. During the Katnut, the two Heyin
are connected in the Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh ha Bet by the force of the
dominion of the Upper Rosh. Then the Tachton is considered to be
without a Rosh.
During the Gadlut, performed by the He’arat AB, the Parsa conceals
the Rosh Aleph and its dominion is unapparent. At that time the lower
Hey descends from place of the Eynaim de Rosh Bet below Peh de

--- PAGE 360 ---
Rosh ha Bet, and the three Sefirot AHP return to the Rosh. Then the
Tachton acquires Behinat Rosh and GAR.
28. Know, that Katnut and Gadlut apply only in the Partzufim MA and
BON in all the degrees, where the lower Hey is already in the Nikvey
Eynaim of their Rosh. They are considered the Behinat Guf of that
Rosh.
Thus you see that the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim are considered the first
MA and BON in the Olamot. Even though half of the Partzuf Upper
MA and BON clothes from Peh de SAG downwards to the Tabur of
Partzuf Galgalta de AK, it also stemmed form the Nikvey Eynaim de
Rosh de SAG. However, because the lower Hey is connected to the
First Hey in it, it is no longer considered Behinat MA and BON.
This is so because the Masach in it consists of the lower Hey when it
came out of Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh SAG, and descended to its
corresponding Behina, which is the Tabur, being the place of the
lower Hey, and not above Tabur. Thus, only the Eser Sefirot de
Nekudim are considered MA and BON, and only in them does the
above matter of Katnut and Gadlut apply.
Moreover, even the GAR de Nekudim are not considered actual MA
and BON, because the lower Hey remains in the Nikvey Eynaim de
Rosh ha Bet, which are the GAR de Nekudim. Also, YHV are without
any manifestation of the lower Hey descended in the AHP of this Rosh
Bet, which are the HB in it.
Thus, the lower Hey is only at the Keter de GAR de Nekudim, which is
this Galgalta ve Eynaim of this Rosh. However, in these HB de GAR,
there is only Behinat First Hey. Thus, they too are not considered
actual MA and BON. Despite that, the matter of Gadlut and Katnut
does operate in them because there is still the lower Hey in them, as
Holam over their Otiot YHV, meaning in the Keter.
The real MA and BON are the seven lower Sefirot de Nekudim, which
are the real Guf de Nekudim. They are the first Shoresh of MA and
BON in the Olamot from now on, though Behinat MA does not exist in
them for there was the breaking of the vessels in them (see Part 7).

--- PAGE 361 ---
Only the Behinat BON was left of it, hence these MA and BON are
only referred to as BON in the Rav’s words.
29. The lower Hey made four steps from the time she connected with the
First Hey and came in the Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh SAG, until she came
to her place, which is Guf de Nekudim, called ZAT de Nekudim.
The first step from Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh SAG to the place of Tabur
de Guf de AK ha Pnimi, which is the Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh ha
Aleph, called YESHSUT. There she permanently connected with the
First Hey and became a fixed Shoresh to Partzuf MAN and BON in its
Behinat Katnut.
A second step to Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh ha Bet, where there is the
Tikun of the Parsa. The lower Hey is separated from the place of
Nikvey Eynaim by the Zivug de AB SAG, and descends to the place of
this Peh de Rosh.
The third step is the descent of the lower Hey from Nikvey Eynaim
below the Peh. It is called Hitlabshut NHY de Keter to Behinat
Mochin and GAR in Hochma and Bina de Nekudim. Through the
descent of the lower Hey under the YHV, they return to Behinat Rosh,
and where they were previously only HGT, they have now become
HBD. They clothe the three Upper Prakin de NHY de AK: Hochma on
Perek Elyon de Netzah; Bina on Perek Elyon de Hod; Daat on Perek
Elyon de Yesod.
A fourth step is from Yesod de AK to Daat de HB, as Nekuda inside
the Otiot de YHV. Then AVI mate on the collective MAN from Vav and
Nekuda, and beget the MA and BON to their place.
30. Thus the main operations added to the emanation of MA and BON
were explained here. Let us briefly explain them in an orderly manner:
Because of the Hitpashtut of the lower nine of SAG below Tabur de
AK ha Pnimi, illuminating to the Kelim de NHY de AK ha Pnimi, the
two Heyin became cohesive and connected. This is because the Ohr
SAG is Behinat First Hey, and NHY de AK ha Pnimi is the lower Hey.

--- PAGE 362 ---
Thus, when the matter of the Hizdakchut of the Masach returned to
Partzuf SAG as well, the Masach was found to be consisting of two
Partzufim here: Partzuf SAG and Partzuf Galgalta, raising them
together to the Rosh de SAG, to Nikvey Eynaim, meaning to Behina
Aleph from there.
Because the lower Hey is not in its place, but was incorporated and
united with the First Hey, meaning the First Hey received and became
Behinat lower Hey, hence the Zivug was made on the First Hey alone.
Consequently, two Zivugim were made there: one for the Zachar, and
one for the Nekeva. However, the primary Zivug occurred in the
Behinat Nekeva, which is Behina Aleph. This is because she is
complete with Behinat Hamshacha too, from which there is
Hitpashtut to Kelim.
When the Aviut de Guf in the Masach was recognized, it departed
from the Rosh de SAG and descended to its corresponding Behina in
the Guf, being Tabur de AK ha Pnimi. This is because there begins the
place of the lower Hey, contained in the Masach, and there it mated
with the Ohr Elyon and the Eser Sefirot de Rosh called YESHSUT
elicited from Tabur upwards.
Bina, ZA and Malchut of that Rosh already stand below Tabur because
the lower Hey stands at its Hochma, which is also the place of Tabur,
and the Sefirot below Hochma stand from the Tabur down. Also, they
are the GAR de Nekudim, meaning the core of the Rosh de Nekudim.
This is because the first Rosh is not at all considered Nekudim, as the
lower Hey in the Masach is below it, and the Aviut doesn’t operate
whatsoever from below upward. Hence, it is considered Akudim de
SAG. For that reason GAR of Nekudim remain the Behinat Rosh of the
Nekudim, named Rosh ha Bet.
This Rosh ha Bet has Eser Sefirot too, divided by the GAR. GE are
incorporated in the Keter, and AHP are in Hochma and Bina. The
lower Hey is in Keter, which is Behinat Rosh ha Bet, and Hochma and
Bina, which are AHP, departed from Rosh ha Bet into Behinat HGT,
meaning Behinat Guf.

--- PAGE 363 ---
You find in them that the lower Hey in the Eynaim and the YHV in
these AHP, meaning the lower Hey does not shine anything in these
AHP, which are Hochma and Bina. Instead, they are only Behinat
First Hey.
The Tikun of the Parsa is on this Rosh ha Bet, where there are two
Tikkunim:
1. The first is that the two Heyin contained in it are diagonal, meaning
that a fissuring of the Parsa is sometimes possible there. At that time
the two Heyin separated from one another and the lower Hey
descended from there downward below Malchut of this Rosh, as
Kamatz under Otiot YHV.
2. The second is to hide and conceal at that time the force of the lower
Hey that stands at the Nikvey Eynaim of the first Rosh with a tight
connection with the First Hey. It is so because had it not been for that
concealment, it would have been impossible for the lower Hey of the
second Rosh to descend below the Otiot.
Here was the Shoresh for the state of Katnut of the Partzufim made,
meaning a possibility of ascent and Gadlut. However, it can never be
that it would also diminish more than the Komat Katnut that was in it.
This guard extends by the force of the lower Hey in the Nikvey
Eynaim of the First Rosh, tightly connected there with the First Hey.
Also, the state of Gadlut extends from the lower Hey in the Nikvey
Eynaim of the second Rosh.
Two operations were made in order to beget the Gadlut de Nekudim:
the first for the Rosh of the Nekudim, where by the Zivug de AB SAG
the lower Hey in the Eynaim that stood above HB, which are YHV,
descended and went under these Otiot YHV. In that the HB returned to
the second Rosh, and the YHV that were HGT rose and became HBD.
This is called Hitlabshut NHY de Keter in Hochma and Bina. The
second operation was for the ZAT, which are the true Guf de Nekudim.
Yesod de AK illuminated the point of the lower Hey inside the Otiot,
within the HB de Nekudim, as Melafom, which is a point in the Vav.

--- PAGE 364 ---
They became MAN in HB and mated on them, begetting the ZAT de
Nekudim. This will be explained in the next part.
31. We find thirteen operations here:
1. The connection of the two Heyin, the First Hey and the lower Hey.
2. Hitkalelut of the Masach in the Reshimot of the two Partzufim from
Partzuf SAG and from Partzuf Galgalta de AK.
3. The Zivug was made only on the Behinat First Hey.
4. The descent of the Masach after its Hitkalelut in the two Zivugim of
the Rosh, its arriving at the place of Tabur de AK ha Pnimi.
5. Rosh ha Aleph, called YESHSUT.
6. Rosh ha Bet, called GAR de Nekudim.
7. The exit of Bina and ZON outside the degree in all the degrees.
8. The preparation of the place for the three separated Olamot, called
Beria, Yetzira, and Assiya, and the Kav of Ein Sof that previously
stopped at the middle point, being the point of Olam ha Zeh. Also,
Behinat Malchut de NHY de AK ha Pnimi rose above the new point of
Tzimtzum to the place of Bina de NHY de AK ha Pnimi.
9. The division of Rosh ha Bet itself into GE and AHP, where the lower
Hey is in the Eynaim and YHV in the AHP.
10. The correction of the Parsa.
11. The correction of Gadlut and Katnut.
12. The lowering of the lower Hey below Otiot YHV, which was for the
purpose of Gadlut and Panim be Panim de GAR of the Nekudim.
13. The arriving of the lower Hey into the Otiot for the purpose of the
emanation of ZAT de Nekudim.
32. Now we shall explain the connections of cause and consequence in
them:
1. The first is the connection of the two Heyin. They extend from the
He’arat lower nine de SAG, which are Behina Bet and lower Hey, into
the Kelim of the Inner NHY de AK, being Behina Dalet and lower Hey.

--- PAGE 365 ---
2. The second is the Hitkalelut of the Masach from the Reshimot of the
two Partzufim, SAG and NHY de AK. They too extend from the
He’arah of SAG to the Kelim de AK ha Pnimi.
3. The third is the Zivug that was only on Aviut of the First Hey. It
extends because the Reshimo de SAG is the principle, and the lower
Hey de NHY de AK is subordinate to it, connected to SAG through its
illumination to NHY.
4. The fourth is the descent of the Masach to the place of Tabur. It
extends by the force of the lower Hey contained in that Masach, and
the connection of the Heyin being from the Tabur de AK downwards
because of the Hitpashtut Ohr SAG there, and not from Tabur
upwards.
5. The fifth is Rosh ha Aleph. It extends from the Hitkalelut of the
Masach in the Aviut of the Rosh. Hence, as it descends below as well,
it first elicits the Behinat from below upward, which is like all the
Partzufim.
6. The sixth is Rosh ha Bet, called GAR de Nekudim. It extends from the
AHP that departed from Rosh ha Aleph.
7. The seventh is the exit of Bina, ZA and Malchut from all the degrees.
It extends by the force of the lower Hey that was connected with the
First Hey, and the First Hey receiving the Tzura of the lower Hey.
That creates a Zivug in the Nikvey Eynaim, and Bina and ZON exit
from the Rosh, and similarly so from all the degrees.
33. 8. The eighth is the place that became the three separated Olamot BYA
and the Kav of Ein Sof that stopped at Bina de NHY de AK. It too
extends from the ascent of the lower Hey in Nikvey Eynaim because
Bina, ZA and Malchut de NHY came out below the point of the
Tzimtzum, which has now risen above Bina de NHY. This Bina
became Olam Beria, the ZA, Olam Yetzira, and Malchut, Olam Assiya.
9. The ninth is the division of the second Rosh into lower Hey in the
Eynaim and YHV in the AHP. It extends from the division of Partzuf
SAG on Taamim and Nekudot, called AB and SAG (see above item 25).

--- PAGE 366 ---
Hence, the Masach that rose from there to Rosh de SAG elicited two
Behinot Rosh there:
27. One from Behinat Taamim and AB, from which Partzuf Elyon de MA
extends, beginning [another version from the manuscript of Baal
HaSulam: in that] in Peh de SAG and ending in Tabur.
28. And a second Rosh from the Behinat Nekudot and SAG de SAG, from
which the Partzuf Tachton de MA and BON extends, beginning from
Tabur de AK downward, which are the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim (see
here items 24, 25).
The first Rosh is from Behinat lower Hey in the Eynaim, whose
branches are Se’arot Rosh, and the second Rosh is from Behinat YHV
in the AHP, whose branches are Se’arot Dikna (Ohr Pnimi items 2 and
19).
It explains there that although the second Rosh is AHP of the first
Rosh, still it is a complete Rosh in and of itself. The reason is that the
Masach descended to its Behinat Nikvey Eynaim and made the Zivug
with the Ohr Elyon on the Aviut de Behinot Nekudot in it, generating
Eser Sefirot from below upward.
It is so because in every place where the Tzura of Aviut was renewed
in the Masach, a new Zivug was made. Hence, there are three Behinot
discerned in Rosh ha Bet:
1. Bina, ZA and Malchut that came out of Rosh ha Aleph.
2. Behinat complete Rosh, meaning that a new Zivug was made on the
Behinat Nekudot in it, mixed with the lower Hey.
3. It is necessarily divided into GE and AHP, since the new Zivug made
in it was only in the Nikvey Eynaim, meaning Behina Aleph. It is also
regarded that its lower Hey is in the Eynaim and YHV in the AHP, and
the AHP came out of the Rosh.
It is known that the Masach displays all the Zivugim it consists of in
the Rosh de Elyon after it comes down to its place in the Guf de Elyon.
Hence, these two Roshim appear below as well:

--- PAGE 367 ---
1. The first Rosh from Tabur upwards, called YESHSUT, considered
Taamim and AB.
2. The second Rosh from Tabur down.
They contain the same three above Behinot, which are a complete
Rosh in and of themselves. Also, the AHP from the Behinat Rosh ha
Aleph, and the Behinat division of the lower Hey in the Eynaim and
YHV in the AHP, where these AHP depart from this second Rosh.
34. 10. The tenth is the correction of the Parsa. It too extends from the
division of Partzuf de MA and BON into two Partzufim on the Tabur,
imprinted and generated by the force of SAG’s division into Taamim
and Nekudot (see here item 33).
It is so because originally they are one Partzuf, as the Taamim and
Nekudot of SAG extend from one Rosh: the Taamim are Keter de Guf
SAG and the Nekudot are the lower nine of that Guf. Hence, the MA
and BON too come from their Masach. Although they have two
Roshim, they are also considered one Guf.
Thus, this division is similar to the Parsa inside the intestines of a
person, where this Parsa divides a single Guf and makes it be like two
separate Gufim.
On the one hand, the Gevul in the Parsa is similar to the Gevul in the
Tzipornaim of the Raglaim of the Partzuf, since it too stands and ends
the Upper Partzuf of MA and BON. It is related to Partzuf AB de SAG
and Taamim and is considered AVI de MA and BON, where the
Tzipornaim of the Raglaim end on the Parsa.
On the other hand it is in the middle of the Partzuf, since on the part
of the Shoresh the Taamim and Nekudot are only one Partzuf. Thus,
the middle and the Sium are mixed in it together. Consequently, two
corrections shine in it:
1. The force of the connection of the two Partzufim. It is helped by the
primary Zivug AB SAG, when the AB de SAG and SAG de SAG
became one and the lower Hey descended from the Eynaim under the

--- PAGE 368 ---
Otiot YHV, and the AHP in all the degrees return to their degree as in
the beginning.
2. The second correction is the concealment of the permanent lower Hey
in Rosh ha Aleph, so that it doesn’t manifest its force when the AHP
return to the Rosh. In that regard, she distinguishes the first Rosh
above her as a separate Partzuf, not connected whatsoever with the
second Rosh.
35. 11. The eleventh is the correction of Gadlut and Katnut.
12. The twelfth is the lowering of the lower Hey below the YHV,
sufficient for the returning of HB de Nekudim Panim be Panim. It
extends by the Zivug de AB and SAG by the force of the two Tikkunim
in the Parsa.
13. The thirteenth is the permeation of the lower Hey into the Otiot for the
purpose of the creation of the ZAT de Nekudim, being the real Guf. It
extends from the He’arat Yesod de AK to the Rosh de Nekudim, of the
Behinat Shuruk, which is a Nekuda inside the Vav. This matter will be
explained in completeness in Part 7.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 369 ---
T Q A
ABLE OF UESTIONS AND NSWERS
M W
FOR THE EANING OF THE ORDS
1. Aleph in the Vav de SAG?
2. What are Otiot?
3. What are AHP in their Place?
4. What is Butzina de Kardinuta?
5. What is the Fissuring of the Parsa?
6. What is One Over the Other?
7. What is Holam?
8. What is Taffel?
9. What is “Coming out Strongly”?
10. What are Twenty-two Otiot?
11. What are Male Mayim Elyonim?
12. What are Female Mayim Tachtonim?
13. What is Melafom?
14. What is Mazla?
15. What is Mayin Nukvin?
16. What is Death?
17. What is Upper Nekudot?
18. What are Nekudot Under the Otiot?
19. What is Nitzotz de Kardinuta?
20. What are Nikvey Eynaim?
21. What are Nikvey Awzen?

--- PAGE 370 ---
22. What is the Opening of the Eynaim?
23. What is Parsa?
24. What is Tzimtzum Bet?
25. What are Tzipornaim of the Raglaim?
26. What is Separating Rakia?
27. What is Shuruk?
28. What are Se’arot Rosh?
29. What are Se’arot Dikna?
30. What is Shibolet ha Zakan?

--- PAGE 371 ---
1. What is Aleph in the Vav de SAG?
There are two Shorashim for the Otiot Yod and Aleph. Indeed, the Yod
is considered the genuine Shoresh of the Otiot, since when we want to
write any Ot, we begin with Yod, meaning with a point. When we
stretch the point sideways and down, the desired Ot appears. Thus, the
Yod is the Shoresh of each and every Ot. Despite that, the Aleph heads
all twenty-two Otiot.
The thing is that the Otiot in their Upper Shoresh are Kelim for the
reception of the Shefa. It is known that Hitpashtut Ohr and its
Histalkut cause the making of the Kelim. This is so because the Kelim
are made of the Reshimot that remain after the Histalkut Ohr.
From that you will understand that the Shoresh of all sorts of
departures is the Shoresh to the Kelim, being the Otiot. It is known
that the first Tzimtzum is the Shoresh of any Histalkut in the Olamot.
Hence, the Nekuda of Tzimtzum, being the Yod, is considered the
Shoresh of all the Otiot.
However, it is known that Tzimtzum Aleph is still not considered the
Shoresh of the Olamot, only the Shoresh de Shoresh, because the real
Shoresh of the Olamot is Tzimtzum Bet. The difference between them
is that Tzimtzum Aleph was only on a single Nekuda, namely Behina
Dalet, which is Malchut, the lower Hey. Tzimtzum Bet, however, was
also on Bina, meaning the two Nekudot joined in this Tzimtzum, the
Nekuda of Malchut and the Nekuda of Bina, which is the association
of Midat ha Rachamim with Din.
It is known that connecting two Nekudot together creates a Kav,
longitudinally or across. Hence, Tzimtzum Bet is called a Kav, because
of the two Nekudot that joined in this Tzimtzum, as it says, “and they
two went.” Because of that it is called Rakia, or Parsa, which is like a
Kav laid across, separating the Elyonim from the Tachtonim.
It has been explained inside the book that the primary innovation that
occurred in Tzimtzum Bet is the matter of the division of the Eser
Sefirot into two Behinot in all the degrees. This is because Bina, ZA

--- PAGE 372 ---
and Malchut of every degree went out of the degree and acquired the
value of its inferior degree. Thus, from a single degree, an upper and
lower were made, where Keter and Hochma became the upper, and
Bina, ZA and Malchut became a lower degree to Keter and Hochma.
These two innovations, which are the connection of the two points
together like a line and the division of the degree into upper and lower
manifest in the shape of the Aleph(א): the connection of the two points
in the Tzimtzum is the line of the Aleph in this manner – (). The upper
Behina of each degree is the Yod(י) over the Kav, containing Keter and
Hochma of the degree, as Mayim Elyonim, like this (). The lower
Behina of each degree is the lower Yod below the Kav, containing
Bina, ZA and Malchut, which became the Tachtonim, meaning Mayim
Tachtonim, like this ().
Thus, you can see how there are two Shorashim to the Olamot: the
Yod is the first Shoresh, made in the first Tzimtzum only on the point
of Malchut, and the Aleph is the second Shoresh, made in Tzimtzum
Bet on the two points Bina and Malchut together.
The first Tzimtzum is a far Shoresh from the Olamot, and only
Tzimtzum Bet is considered the Shoresh of the Olamot. Hence, the Yod
is not considered the Shoresh of the Olamot, until it is fit to head all
the twenty-two Otiot.
Only the Ot Aleph is considered the Shoresh of all the Otiot, since it is
regarded as Tzimtzum Bet, being the true Shoresh to the Olamot.
Hence, the Aleph is at the head of the twenty-two Otiot, and the Yod is
considered a primordial Shoresh, serving the Otiot in hiding.
Now you can understand the meaning of the four fulfillments
operating in the Name HaVaYaH. They are: AB – Yod, Hey, Viv, Hey;
SAG – Yod, Hey, Vav, Hey; MA – Yod, He, Vv, He; BON – Yod, Heh,
Vav, Heh.
The primary difference is whether the Kelim come from Tzimtzum
Aleph, or from Tzimtzum Bet. Fulfilling the Otiot with Yodin indicates
that they come primarily from Tzimtzum Aleph, and fulfilling the Otiot
with Alephin indicates that they come from Tzimtzum Bet.

--- PAGE 373 ---
Now you can see that if all the Otiot de HaVaYaH are fulfilled with
Yodin, being HaVaYaH de AB, then the Kelim of that Partzuf have
nothing of Behinat Tzimtzum Bet, only Tzimtzum Aleph. Conversely, if
the Otiot are filled with Alephin, which is Gimatria MA, then the
Kelim of that Partzuf have nothing of Behinat Tzimtzum Aleph, only
Tzimtzum Bet.
However, in HaVaYaH de SAG the Otiot are not filled equally, as they
are all with Yodin except for the Vav de HaVaYaH, which is with
Aleph.
The reason for it is that HaVaYaH is also divided into four Partzufim,
which are: Hochma, Bina, ZA and Malchut, by the order of her Otiot.
Thus, the Vav in her is Behinat ZA de Partzuf SAG.
It is known that Tzimtzum Bet was only in Partzuf SAG, not in the first
two Partzufim in her, being YH, meaning Hochma and Bina in her, but
only in ZA in her, standing below Tabur de SAG (see Histaklut Pnimit
item 15).
Thus, the beginning of the Shoresh of the Aleph, meaning Tzimtzum
Bet, was not in YH de SAG, only in the Vav de SAG. Hence the YH de
SAG are filled with Yodin as in HaVaYaH de AB, but the Vav de SAG is
filled with the Aleph, as Tzimtzum Bet is unapparent at all before ZA
de SAG.
The matter of HaVaYaH fulfilled with Heyin indicates that she lacks
the fulfillment, but receives from her Upper Partzuf. Hence she is only
double HaVaYaH, for two HaVaYot are BON in Gimatria.
The reason for it is that the fulfillment indicates the measure of the
Koma extending by the Zivug of the Ohr Elyon on the Masach there.
The Masach in Partzuf ZA, being in Aviut de Behina Aleph, extends
the Ohr for Malchut too, whose Masach is very frail. It doesn’t have
sufficient Aviut for Zivug de Hakaa with the Ohr Elyon, hence she
lacks the fulfillment of her Behina. All she has is double HaVaYaH,
indicating the part of ZA in her.

--- PAGE 374 ---
Now you can see why Hochma and Bina are not considered the
Shoresh of the Olam, and the Olam begins only in ZA. This is the
meaning of the six days of creation, as their Kelim contain only from
Behinat Tzimtzum Aleph. Thus, only ZA, being Behinat HaVaYaH de
MA with fulfillment of Alephin, meaning Tzimtzum Bet, is the Shoresh
for all the Olamot.
2. What are Otiot?
See answer No. 1.
3. What are AHP in their Place?
The first three Tikkunim of the thirteen Tikkunim of Dikna are called
“AHP in their Place”. It means that they did not come out from the
Behinot Rosh, and they are Behinot GE de Rosh of the Dikna. They
are named AHP only with respect to Rosh de SAG.
(Part 6, item 20)
4. What is Butzina de Kardinuta?
Butzina means illumination and Kardinuta means hardness or
darkness. It implies the lower Hey, meaning Behina Dalet. This is the
meaning of the lower Hey in the Eynaim in Keter de Nekudim, whose
He’arah is uncovered. It is the Nekuda inside the Vav, meaning the
Melafom that poured Yesod de AK to HB de Nekudim. Only the Vav
actually appeared, but the Nekuda is concealed in it. This means that
Butzina de Kardinuta is concealed in Yesod de Ima.
(Part 6, item 37)
5. What is the Fissuring of the Parsa?
The fissuring of the Parsa implies the annulment of the Gevul in her,
separating between Keter Hochma, and Bina and ZON inside the Toch
of the degree. Through the fissuring, Bina and ZON return to the
degree as in the beginning.
(Part 6, item 15)
6. What is One Over the Other?

--- PAGE 375 ---
One Over the Other means that the Sefirot stand by themselves and
cannot receive or bestow upon each other. This is due to the disparity
of form between each and every one of them, separating them from
one another. In that state they stand one over the other according to the
order of degrees; the Panim of the Tachton in the Achor de Elyon.
For instance: ZA, whose Panim is Behina Aleph, equalizes with the
Achor de Bina, who is also Behina Aleph. Also, Panim of Bina, being
Behina Bet, equalizes with Achor de Hochma, which is also Behina
Bet, etc. similarly. In that state they are opposite from one another and
separated from one another.
(Part 4, Chap 3, Ohr Pnimi item 30)
7. What is Holam?
The Nekudot indicate primarily the He’arat Zivug emerging by the
force of the connection of the lower Hey with the first Hey, called
Nekudot.
There are three Behinot in that:
1. When the lower Hey is in Keter de Nekudim in the form of Lower Hey
in the Eynaim and YHV in the AHP. In that state she is called Holam,
which is above the Otiot YHV.
It is so because Ohr Keter is not poured to the HB from Behinat lower
Hey, but only from Behinat first Hey.
2. As Nekudot under the Otiot YHV, which are the Kelim of HB. This is
by the Upper Zivug of AB and SAG, lowering the lower Hey from the
Eynaim to the Peh in the form of Kamatz under the Otiot.
Even now the lower Hey is concealed in the Kamatz, which is Behinat
Yesod de Keter, and the YHV still have no He’arat lower Hey.
3. In the form of Nekudot inside the Otiot de YHV. This is by the He’arat
Yesod de AK on the Behinat Melafom, where the Nekuda de lower Hey
is inside the Vav.
This He’arah comes inside the Otiot de YHV, which are HB, from
which elicit the Lower Seven de Nekudim.

--- PAGE 376 ---
(Part 6, item 31, and Histaklut Pnimit item 19)
8. What is Taffel?
The first Sefira in every degree contains all the Behinot below it.
Hence, the Upper Behina is always considered the kernel of the
degree, compared to which all other Behinot are secondary, and do not
merit a name.
(Part 6, item 8)
9. What is “Coming out Strongly”?
The greater the Aviut in the Masach, the more strongly the Ohr comes
out. If the Aviut is frail, the Ohr does not come out strongly, meaning
there is little Ohr Hozer, and the Komat Ohr it extends does not
expand downward. Since the lower Hey connected with the Nikvey
Eynaim, the Orot there are found to be coming out forcefully,
expanding downward.
(Part 6, item 11)
10. What are Twenty-two Otiot?
The Otiot are the Kelim where the Atzmut clothes. They contain
twenty-two heads of discernments, from which all the Partzufim are
built. They are called, twenty-two Otiot. See answer No. 1.
(Part 6, item 53)
11. What are Male Mayim Elyonim?
See answer No. 1.
It explains there that Keter of the Nekudim is the Mayim Elyonim
above the Rakia, which is the Parsa. HB de Nekudim is the Mayim
Tachtonim under the Rakia.
It is known that Keter is the Zachar, and HB is its Nekeva (Ohr Pnimi
item 23). Thus, Mayim Elyonim are considered Zachar, and Mayim
Tachtonim, being HB, are Behinat Nekeva.
(Part 6, item 9)
12. What are Female Mayim Tachtonim?

--- PAGE 377 ---
See answers No. 11 and answer No. 1.
13. What is Melafom?
See answer No. 7.
14. What is Mazla?
Se’arot Dikna are called Mazla, as it is written, “Water shall flow from
his branches etc.” This is because their Shefa flows bit-by-bit until
they join the greater Orot in the Olamot (see below answer No. 29).
(Part 6, item 2)
15. What is Mayin Nukvin?
It is known that two Behinot Reshimot were joined in the Masach
through the Hitpashtut of Nekudot de SAG to MA and BON de AK ha
Pnimi: Behinot first Hey in SAG, and the lower Hey in AK ha Pnimi.
You find that the Masach consists of two females, Bina and Malchut,
hence the name of the Masach “Mayin Nukvin”. From here on these
two females are incorporated in it in every Zivug it makes with the
Ohr Elyon.
(Part 6, item 15)
16. What is Death?
Life is until the place where Kav Ohr Ein Sof reaches. After the Sium
of the Kav, meaning below the point of Tzimtzum, the Light of life
ceases. This is Behinat Death.
Hence, the Kelim that fell to BYA, below the new point of Tzimtzum,
are considered to have died there, as they were departed from the
Light of life.
(Part 6, item 39)
17. What is Upper Nekudot?
See answer No. 7.
18. What are Nekudot Under the Otiot?
See answer No. 7.

--- PAGE 378 ---
Three He’arot operated in Nekudim: Hevel ha Tabur, Hevel ha Yesod,
and Hevel de Tzipornaim of the Raglaim. The Hevel Tabur is the
Behinat Nekudot above the Otiot, meaning Holam. Hevel ha Yesod is
Behinat Nekudot inside the Otiot, being the Melafom, and Hevel de
Tzipornaim of the Raglaim is the Behinot Nekudot under the Otiot.
(Part 6, item 28, and Ohr Pnimi there)
19. What is Nitzotz de Kardinuta?
See answer No. 4.
20. What are Nikvey Eynaim?
Behina Aleph in the Rosh is called Nikvey Eynaim because Hochma de
Rosh is called Eynaim, and because of the ascent of the lower Hey
there, Behinat Nukva was also made in Hochma, called Nikvey
Eynaim.
(Part 6, item 7)
21. What are Nikvey Awzen?
See answer No. 20.
The two Heys joined in the association of Midat ha Rachamim with
Din, and the lower Hey rose to the Eynaim. From then on a Behinat
Nukva was made in all the Sefirot up to Hochma. These are the
Nekavim (foramens) made in Hotem, Awzen, and the Eynaim.
However, before they were connected, Behinat Nukva was only in the
Peh.
22. What is the Opening of the Eynaim?
He’arat Hochma is called “Opening of the Eynaim” because Eynaim
are Hochma.
(Part 6, item 51)
23. What is Parsa?
Parsa is the premises of the liver (diaphragm) separating the breathing
organs, which are the sustenance, from the feeding organs. It
seemingly creates two Gufim within a single Guf. Similarly, when

--- PAGE 379 ---
Partzuf MA and BON came out of the Nikvey Eynaim, it was divided
into two Partzufim on the Tabur and the Parsa.
From Peh de Rosh SAG to Parsa it is Behinat GAR de MA and BON,
considered a complete Partzuf in and of itself. Its Sium Raglaim is on
the Tabur, because it came out from the Behinat Reshimot de Taamim
de SAG that didn’t connect with the lower Hey.
From Parsa down came out the lower BON, being the Eser Sefirot de
Nekudim. They came out from Behinat Nekudot de SAG, and
connected with the lower Hey below Tabur. Thus, the Parsa divides a
single Partzuf of MA and BON into two Partzufim.
(Part 6, item 9, and Histaklut Pnimit item 34)
24. What is Tzimtzum Bet?
Tzimtzum NHY de AK is called Tzimtzum Bet. This is because
similarly to Tzimtzum Aleph on Behina Dalet in Ein Sof, so here there
was a Tzimtzum on Behina Bet.
As Kav Ohr de Ein Sof stopped at the Malchut of NHY de AK, so Kav
Ohr Ein Sof stopped here on Bina de NHY de AK. Thus Bina, ZA and
Malchut remained under the point of Tzimtzum without Ohr, forming
the three separated Olamot, called BYA: Beria from Bina, Yetzira from
ZA and Assiya from Malchut.
(Part 6, item 7)
25. What are Tzipornaim of the Raglaim?
The Behinot Sium of every Partzuf, which is Malchut de NHY of the
Partzuf, is called Etzbaot Raglaim. From the time of the Tikun of
Parsa on, another force was made on the Behinat Sium of the Partzuf,
relating to the association of the point of Bina in the Tzimtzum.
When this additional force is in the place of Tabur, it is called Parsa;
when it is in the place of Sium NHY, it is called Tzipornaim, namely
Tzipornaim of the Raglaim.
(Part 6, item 29)
26. What is Separating Rakia?

--- PAGE 380 ---
The “Separating Rakia” is the Parsa placed in the Eser Sefirot of each
degree by the connection of the two points, Bina and Malchut. It
distinguishes Keter and Hochma in it as Male Mayim Elyonim, from
the Bina, ZA and Malchut in it, being Behinat Female Mayim
Tachtonim, See answer No. 11 and answer No. 1.
(Part 6, item 9)
27. What is Shuruk?
The Melafom is also called Shuruk, explained in above in answer No.
7.
(Part 6, item 31)
28. What are Se’arot Rosh?
The first Zivug for Partzuf Nekudim was in Nikvey Eynaim of Rosh de
SAG. It did not take out the AHP of Rosh de SAG outwardly, since
there is no absence in the spiritual.
The matter of the division of the degree did not affect in Rosh SAG
itself whatsoever, only as an addition to the Partzuf, being the Partzuf
Se’arot. From Nikvey Eynaim up came out the Se’arot Rosh, and from
there down the Se’arot Dikna in Behinot AHP.
(Ohr Pnimi item 2)
29. What are Se’arot Dikna?
See answer No. 28.
30. What is Shibolet ha Zakan?
Shibolet ha Zakan is Behinot AHP that came out of the first Rosh de
Dikna because the first three Tikkunim de Dikna are Behinot GE,
meaning Rosh de Dikna. Shibolet ha Zakan is the AHP that came out
of Rosh de Dikna into Behinat Guf, where the Shefa of the first three
Behinot Tikkunim of Dikna accumulates.
(Part 6 item 9, and Ohr Pnimi item 23)
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 381 ---
T Q T
ABLE OF UESTIONS FOR OPICS
31. How are the ascents of the Orot to the Rosh of SAG different than
in all the other Partzufim?
32. How many Orot rose from below, from Tabur, for MAN?
33. What is the new Ohr that emerged by the Tzimtzum NHY and
their ascent upward?
34. Is the Ohr that came out of Nikvey Eynaim Atzmut or additions?
35. What is the Koma that came out of Nikvey Eynaim?
36. How many Zivugim were there for the purpose of Nekudim?
37. What is the gist and the Atzmut of Nekudim?
38. What is the first Behina of Nekudim?
39. What is the second Behina of Nekudim?
40. What is the third Behina of Nekudim?
41. Where do GAR de Nekudim take Ohr?
42. Why did GAR de Nekudim not die?
43. Why is there no cancellation in the Keter, but only in the
Achoraim of AVI?
44. Why is the primary He’arah of Nekudim only through Panim?
45. Why does the Guf de Nekudim begin from Daat and not from
Keter, as in every other place?
46. Why is Keter not called Daat?
47. From which place in Dikna do GAR de Nekudim extend?
48. What caused the ascent of the Nekudot from MA and BON?

--- PAGE 382 ---
49. Which renewal occurred in the ascent of the Masach de SAG
compared to the other Partzufim?
50. How did Behina Dalet connect in the Masach de SAG after it had
already been purified into Behina Aleph?
51. Why did Komat Keter not come out of the lower Hey in Nikvey
Eynaim as in Partzuf Galgalta?
52. Why did the Masach rise to Nikvey Eynaim and not to Peh?
53. Why are all the Tikkunim dependent primarily on MA and BON?
54. Why is Olam ha Nekudim called BON only?
55. Which Partzuf of AK does the Rav deal with?
56. Where are the Mochin de SAG from?
57. Why does SAG begin from the Awzen?
58. Where does SAG end?
59. Where does AB end?
60. Where do Taamim de SAG end?
61. Where was the place of Nekudot de SAG prior to the Tzimtzum?
62. Why is only Keter de SAG called Taamim?
63. Why are the lower nine called Nekudot?
64. What is the SAG de SAG de AK?
65. Is the division of the degree apparent also in the Rosh de SAG?
66. What caused the division of MA and BON into two Partzufim?
67. What is the merit of MA and BON above Tabur compared to MA
and BON below Tabur?
68. What caused the division of AVI and YESHSUT into two
Partzufim?..
69. Did YESHSUT and GAR de Nekudim connect after the fissuring of
the Parsa?
70. How many Behinot are there in Partzuf Dikna?
71. Why was the Ohr Awzen blocked at Shibolet ha Zakan?

--- PAGE 383 ---
72. What are the four divisions of Nekudim?
73. What is the meaning of “and the arms of his hands were made
supple,” and not his legs?
74. Where is the distinction of the lower Hey in the Eynaim and the
YHV in the AHP most noticed?
75. What does it mean that the Tzimtzum was to diminish the Ohr de
Atzilut?
76. What is the Parsa?
77. What is the correction of the Parsa for the purpose of Beria?
78. What is the difference between Parsa and Sium Raglin?
79. When was the Parsa made?
80. What is the fissuring of the Parsa?
81. Why is the return of the AHP to the Rosh named after the Parsa?
82. Why does the Difference between HaVaYaH de AB and HaVaYaH
de SAG depends entirely on the filling of Aleph in the Vav?
83. Is the connection of the two Heyin permanent?
84. In which Behina of SAG was the Zivug for the Nekudim?
85. What is the primordial Nekeva of the Olamot?
86. Where do BYA stand?
87. How many fissures were caused by Zivug of AB and SAG?
88. What is the Shoresh for ABYA?
89. Where is the beginning of the association of Midat ha Rachamim
with Din?
90. Where is the Sium Raglin de AK ha Pnimi?
91. Which is the fundamental action of all the innovations made in
Nekudim?
92. What is the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din?
93. What is the reason for the association of Midat ha Rachamim with
Din?

--- PAGE 384 ---
94. What is the name Mayin Nukvin
95. Why is Bina called Beria?
96. What is the difference between Tzimtzum Aleph and Tzimtzum
Bet?…
97. In which Partzuf is there Katnut and Gadlut?
98. When was Zivug de AB and SAG made?
99. Why is the new MA the Taamim of Nekudim?
100. Why is Yesod de Elyon, Daat to the Tachton?
101. Why does the lower Hey descend from the Eynaim through Zivug
AB SAG?
102. What are the two operations that emerge by Zivug de AB and
SAG?…
103. Through what were the correction of Tikun Kavim and ten Kelim
in ZAT too?
104. What are the four steps of the lower Hey before it comes into the
Otiot?
105. How many kinds of Orot operated in Nekudim?
106. What is the difference between Daat Elyon and Daat Tachton?
107. What is the difference between He’arat NHY de Keter and NHY de
AK?
108. Where does the Halbasha of YESHSUT begin?
109. Why don’t the Nekudot clothe any of the SAG, from which they
stem?
110. Where does SAG clothe AB de AK?
111. Why do Nekudim clothe NHY de AK?
112. Why is the Holam on top of the Otiot?
113. Why is the Shuruk in the middle?
114. Why did Abba take the point of Shuruk?

--- PAGE 385 ---
115. Why are Keter and Hochma once called Holam and Shuruk, and
once Kamatz and Patach?
116. Why are Kamatz Patach from the Nekudot under the Otiot?
117. Which Behina of Kamatz Patach did not break?
118. Why are the seven Nekudot in the shape of Yodin?
119. What is the difference between the Nekuda of Holam and Kamatz,
as they are both Keter?
120. What is the main cause for the emergence of Partzuf MA and
BON?…
121. What is the primary cause of a birth of a Partzuf?
122. How does Ohr Makif appear in the birth of Partzufim?
123. What mainly operates to emanate a second Partzuf?
124. How many Nekudot of Sium from Tabur to Sium Raglin?
125. How are there Eser Sefirot from Tabur down, which is only
Malchut?.
126. How are there TNHYM below Tabur?
127. Why are MA and BON below Tabur?
128. Why must MA be associated with the lower Hey?
129. Why isn’t there lower Hey in HB de Nekudim?
130. What is the reason that GAR de ZA de Atzilut remain in Ima?
131. What are the Achoraim de AVI that were cancelled?
132. Why are the lower seven in one Kav?
133. Where were ZON made?
134. Where were the Kelim de Nekudim made?
135. What does it mean that the Kelim were small?
136. What is the need for Dinim and Klipot?
137. What does it mean that the lower Seven are Din and the Ohr that
comes to them is Rachamim?

--- PAGE 386 ---
Questions Regarding Cause and Consequence
138. What eventuates from the yearning of Malchut de Ein Sof for
greater Dvekut with the Ohr Elyon?
139. What eventuates from the Histalkut Ohr from all four Behinot?
140. What eventuates from the Masach?
141. What eventuates from the Ohr Hozer?
[For the Creation of Partzuf AB de AK]
142. What eventuates from the Masach de Tabur de Galgalta?
143. What eventuates from the Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi in
Partzuf Galgalta?
144. What eventuates from the disappearance of the last Behina?
145. What eventuates from of the two Reshimot Zachar and Nekeva
that rose from the Guf de Galgalta?
146. What eventuates from the two Zivugim of ZON that the Masach
makes in its Hitkalelut in Hotem in Rosh de Galgalta?
147. What eventuates from the manifestation of the Aviut de Guf in the
Masach and the Reshimot?
148. What eventuates from the two Zivugim that the Masach makes in
the place of Chazeh de Galgalta?
[For the Creation of Partzuf SAG de AK]
149. What eventuates from the Masach de Tabur de AB?
150. What eventuates from the Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi de
AB?..
151. What eventuates from the disappearance of the last Behina de
AB?…
152. What eventuates from the two Reshimot Zachar and Nekeva that
rose from Histalkut AB?
153. What eventuates from the two Zivugim de ZON that the Masach
made in its Hitkalelut in Awzen de Rosh AB?

--- PAGE 387 ---
154. What eventuates from the manifestation of the Aviut de Guf in the
Masach?
155. What eventuates from the two Zivugim that the Masach makes in
the place of Chazeh de AB?
[For the Creation of Partzuf MA and BON de AK]
156. What eventuates from the Masach de Tabur de SAG?
157. What eventuates from the Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi de
SAG?
158. What eventuates from the concealment of the last Behina de SAG?
159. What eventuates from the two Reshimot ZON that rose in the
Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh de SAG?
160. What eventuates from the Hitkalelut of the Reshimot in the
Zivugim in the Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh de SAG?
161. What eventuates from the manifestation of Aviut de Guf in the
Masach and the Reshimot?
162. What eventuates from the descent of the Masach to its
corresponding Behinot in the Hitzoniut de Guf de SAG?
163. What eventuates from the elicitation of the AHP from all the
degrees?
164. How are the actions connected to one another through cause and
consequence from Tzimtzum Aleph to the end of Olam ha Nekudim
in Katnut?
165. What ten actions were taken through the completion of Partzuf
Galgalta de AK?
166. How are these ten actions connected by cause and consequence?
167. What are the fourteen actions generally executed in the creation
of a Partzuf?
168. How are the fourteen actions of the creation of the Partzuf
interconnected?
169. What are the two actions added in Partzuf SAG?

--- PAGE 388 ---
170. What are the thirteen actions added in Partzuf Nekudim?
171. How are the thirteen actions interconnected by the above order of
cause and consequence?

--- PAGE 389 ---
31. How are the ascents of the Orot to the Rosh of SAG different than
in all the other Partzufim?
The Reshimot de SAG connected with the Reshimot of the Inner MA
and BON. This caused a new Tzimtzum in the Nekuda de Behina Bet.
(Ohr Pnimi item 7)
32. How many Orot rose from below, from Tabur, for MAN?
Two kinds of Orot: the lower nine de SAG, and ZON de AK ha Pnimi.
(Ohr Pnimi item 7)
33. What is the new Ohr that emerged by the Tzimtzum NHY and
their ascent upward?
By the Tzimtzum of NHY, the Reshimot contained in it, rose to the
Rosh de SAG, to Nikvey Eynaim, which are Behina Aleph, and a Koma
de Behina Aleph extended, called MA and BON. When the Aviut de
Guf in the Masach was recognized, it descended from there to its
place in the Guf, which is Tabur. In addition, it is Behinat Katnut de
Nekudim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 10)
34. Is the Ohr that came out of Nikvey Eynaim Atzmut or additions?
It is the Atzmut of the Ohr de Nekudim because what appears in the
beginning of the creation is the Atzmut.
(Ohr Pnimi item 10)
35. What is the Koma that came out of Nikvey Eynaim?
The Koma is primarily Behina Aleph, which is Komat ZA. However,
there is also Behinat Zachar there, having a Koma of Behina Bet as
Hitlabshut that remains from the last Behina.
(Ohr Pnimi item 14)
36. How many Zivugim were there for the purpose of Nekudim?
Two kinds of Zivugim:

--- PAGE 390 ---
• The first Zivug was by the ascent of the Masach and the Reshimot
to the Rosh de SAG to Nikvey Eynaim, from which came the
Behinat Katnut de Nekudim.
• The second Zivug was by the Zivug de AB and SAG and the
fissuring of the Parsa. Consequently, the AHP returned to Behinat
Rosh, and from here emerged the Gadlut de Nekudim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 14)
37. What is the gist and the Atzmut of Nekudim?
The Ohr that came out of the Nikvey Eynaim is considered the Atzmut
of the Nekudim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 14)
38. What is the first Behina of Nekudim?
The first Rosh that came out of Tabur de AK ha Pnimi and up to the
Chazeh, called YESHSUT, is the first Behina of the Nekudim.
However, it is considered Akudim since the Aviut in the Masach that
stands in the place of Tabur is completely inactive from below
upward, hence this Rosh has nothing of Behinat Nekudim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 20)
39. What is the second Behina of Nekudim?
AHP that came out of Rosh ah Aleph and were considered and valued
as Behinat Guf and receiving from it, are the second Behina of the
Nekudim. Also, they are the GAR de Nekudim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 20)
40. What is the third Behina of Nekudim?
The Behinot of the actual Guf of Nekudim, below the AHP, are the
third Behina de Nekudim. They are called “the seven lower Sefirot of
the Nekudim”.
(Ohr Pnimi item 20)
41. Where do GAR de Nekudim take Ohr?

--- PAGE 391 ---
GAR de Nekudim receive from the first three Tikkunim of Dikna in
their gathering place, called Shibolet ha Zakan. This is because the
three Tikkunim of Dikna in their place in the Rosh are Behinat Rosh ha
Aleph of the Dikna.
(Ohr Pnimi item 20)
42. Why did GAR de Nekudim not die?
Because they received their He’arah from Shibolet ha Zakan.
However, the lower seven received their He’arah only from the
Hotem Peh and therefore died.
(Item 23)
43. Why is there no cancellation in the Keter, but only in the
Achoraim of AVI?
Because the Keter is the Behinat Zachar of the MA and BON, having
Behina Bet de Hitlabshut, while Hochma and Bina are the Behinat
Nekeva, having only Aviut de Behina Aleph. Hence the Zachar has
Komat Bina, which is Ohr Awzen, and he also has Behinot GAR from
the beginning of its creation.
For that reason even its Achoraim were not canceled, whereas the
Nekeva, which is HB, has only Komat Behina Aleph, which is ZA.
Thus, she could not receive Komat GAR and their Achoraim were
canceled.
(Ohr Pnimi item 23)
44. Why is the primary He’arah of Nekudim only through Panim?
Because the Ohr Eynaim does not shine to the Kelim de Achor but to
the Kelim de Panim, above Tabur, which are here through the Peh.
The lower seven are considered from Tabur down because the AHP
came out and became Behinot HGT. However, some He’arah does
come to them through the sides as Ohr Hassadim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 25)
45. Why does the Guf de Nekudim begin from Daat and not from
Keter, as in every other place?

--- PAGE 392 ---
Because Rosh ha Aleph took the two Sefirot Keter and Hochma, called
GE, and the second Rosh has only Bina and ZON, meaning AHP de
Rosh ha Aleph. It is known that Rosh ha Aleph does not join Partzuf
Nekudim in any way; only Rosh ha Bet is considered the Rosh of the
Nekudim.
It is also known that the entire amount in the Rosh travels through and
clothes in the Guf. Thus, since there are no more than three Kelim
Bina, ZA and Malchut in the Rosh, there are also not more than these
three Kelim in the Guf, lacking Keter and Hochma.
(Ohr Pnimi item 26)
46. Why is Keter not called Daat?
Because there is Ohr Awzen in Keter too, since there is Behinat
Zachar there, having Behina Bet de Hitlabshut.
(Ohr Pnimi item 26)
47. From which place in Dikna do GAR de Nekudim extend?
From Shibolet ha Zakan.
(Ohr Pnimi item 4)
48. What caused the ascent of the Nekudot from MA and BON?
Because the Masach had been purified of its entire Aviut and
equalized with Malchut of the Rosh, as it is known in the other
Partzufim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
49. Which renewal occurred in the ascent of the Masach de SAG
compared to the other Partzufim?
Here in SAG, the Masach consists of Reshimot of two Partzufim: its
own Partzuf, and Partzuf Galgalta de AK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
50. How did Behina Dalet connect in the Masach de SAG after it had
already been purified into Behina Aleph?

--- PAGE 393 ---
Behina Dalet is primarily from Tabur de Partzuf Galgalta de AK
downward. Even though the Masach has already been purified from
there, it still does not relate to the Kelim in any way, as there is no
Hizdakchut in the Kelim.
However, when the Kelim are emptied of Ohr, they are quiet, inactive.
Thus, when Ohr SAG reached there, Behina Dalet returned and
reappeared as in the beginning.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 7)
51. Why did Komat Keter not come out of the lower Hey in Nikvey
Eynaim as in Partzuf Galgalta?
Because the First Hey is the principal, since the Masach is from
Partzuf SAG. The lower Hey is subordinate to it, having connected in
it through He’arat SAG below Tabur.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 7)
52. Why did the Masach rise to Nikvey Eynaim and not to Peh?
Because the last Behina does not leave a Reshima, except from
Behinat Hitlabshut, from which there is no Hitpashtut Kelim. Also,
nothing remains from the Behinat Hamshacha but Behina Aleph,
hence it rose to its corresponding Behina in the Rosh, which is the
Eynaim.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 7)
53. Why are all the Tikkunim dependent primarily on MA and BON?
Because the lower Hey only connected with MA and BON, and not in
its previous Partzufim. She comes from the below Tabur de AK ha
Pnimi, being the Shoresh of any Tzimtzum and Din in the Olamot.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 8)
54. Why is Olam ha Nekudim called BON only?
Because everything that is considered MA broke in the breaking of the
vessels, and only its Behinat First Hey remained, being ascribed to
BON.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 8)

--- PAGE 394 ---
55. Which Partzuf of AK does the Rav deal with?
Partzuf SAG de AK. This is because it is forbidden to engage in the
first two Partzufim Galgalta de AK and AB de AK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 1)
56. Where are the Mochin de SAG from?
HGT de AK are Neshama and Mochin to the Rosh de SAG.
(Ohr Pnimi item 1)
57. Why does SAG begin from the Awzen?
Because Partzuf SAG comes out on a Masach of Aviut de Behina Bet,
which raises Ohr Hozer and clothes only up to Bina, whose name in
the Rosh is Awzen.
(Ohr Pnimi item 1)
58. Where does SAG end?
Before Tzimtzum Bet expanded to the Sium Raglin of AK, and from
Tzimtzum Bet onward, it rises and ends above Tabur de AK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 1)
59. Where does AB end?
Above Tabur de AK ha Pnimi. This is because the lower Hey is not
contained in the Masach de AB, hence it cannot expand below Tabur,
where Behinot lower Hey is, meaning Malchut de AK ha Pnimi.
(Ohr Pnimi item 1)
60. Where do Taamim de SAG end?
They end equally with Sium Raglin de AB de AK because the Zachar
clothed in Kli de Keter, which is Taamim. It has Komat Hochma, like
the AB, and it too, like AB, cannot shine to the lower Hey below
Tabur.
(Ohr Pnimi item 1)
61. Where was the place of Nekudot de SAG prior to the Tzimtzum?
They begin from Tabur de AK ha Pnimi and end at its Sium Raglin.

--- PAGE 395 ---
(Ohr Pnimi item 1)
62. Why is only Keter de SAG called Taamim?
Because first all the Orot come in Kli de Keter. Only after the Masach
begins to purify and diminish do the other Komot Hochma, Bina and
ZON begin to emerge during the degrees of its purification. It is
known that before the Masach begins to purify, it is Ohr Yashar and
Rachamim. This is only Kli de Keter, hence the name Rachamim.
However, the rest of the lower nine come out along with the
Hizdakchut of the Masach; that is why they are called Nekudot. It
indicates that they are Ohr Hozer and Din.
(Ohr Pnimi item 3)
63. Why are the lower nine called Nekudot?
See above answer No. 62.
64. What is the SAG de SAG de AK?
That part of SAG incorporated in the lower Hey is called SAG de SAG,
meaning the Nekudot of SAG that came out as lower Hey in the
Eynaim and YHV in the AHP. However, that part of SAG not
incorporated in Behinat lower Hey is called Taamim de SAG, or AB de
SAG, or AVI.
(Ohr Pnimi item 4)
65. Is the division of the degree apparent also in the Rosh de SAG?
No division of the degree is apparent in the Rosh of SAG, although it
is where the Zivug of the lower Hey in the Eynaim is rooted. Instead, a
new Partzuf is added there, in the form of Se’arot, whose AHP
departed, called Se’arot Dikna.
(Ohr Pnimi item 2)
66. What caused the division of MA and BON into two Partzufim?
The Masach that purified and rose from the SAG consists of two
Behinot: Reshimot de Taamim, and Reshimot de Nekudot. Thus, two
kinds of Zivugim were made on it:

--- PAGE 396 ---
1. From the Zivug on the Reshimot de Taamim came out the MA and
BON Elyon, clothing the place of Taamim, which is from Peh de SAG
to Tabur.
2. From the Zivug on the Reshimot de Nekudot de SAG came out the MA
and BON Tachton, clothing the place where Nekudot de SAG stood,
from Tabur down. This MA and BON Tachton is the one called Eser
Sefirot de Nekudim.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 24)
67. What is the merit of MA and BON above Tabur compared to MA
and BON below Tabur?
As GAR compared to VAK, or as AVI compared to ZON.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 24)
68. What caused the division of AVI and YESHSUT into two
Partzufim?
The issue of the Hitpashtut of the lower nine below Tabur de AK ha
Pnimi to the place of the lower Hey and Behina Dalet caused the
division of SAG into two Partzufim. This is because the Taamim that
did not mix with the lower Hey and end above Tabur, are considered
the same as AVI compared to the Nekudot that descended below Tabur
and mixed with Behina Dalet. Also, the Nekudot to the Taamim are as
YESHSUT to AVI.
(Item 6)
69. Did YESHSUT and GAR de Nekudim connect after the fissuring of
the Parsa?
The issue of the cancellation of the Gevul of the Parsa was only for
the time being. Hence the lower Hey in YESHSUT is considered
permanent and not as descending below Tabur to connect with the
GAR de Nekudim. Only its He’arah alone descends to the GAR de
Nekudim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 17)
70. How many Behinot are there in Partzuf Dikna?

--- PAGE 397 ---
There are three Behinot in Dikna:
1. The first three Tikkunim of Dikna, connected at the Rosh in the Upper
Lechi (cheek).
2. Shibolet ha Zakan, which is the Behinat AHP that exit from the Rosh.
3. The other Tikkunim of Dikna.
(Ohr Pnimi item 19)
71. Why was the Ohr Awzen blocked at Shibolet ha Zakan?
Because the entire Ohr Awzen in the Ohr Eynaim is merely the
Behinat Zachar, having Behina Bet de Hitlabshut. It is known that
Behinat Zachar has no Behinat Hitpashtut to Kelim. Hence, the
Behinat Kli de Zachar is blocked at Shibolet ha Zakan, which is the
Behinat Keter de Shibolet.
Also, in HB de Shibolet, being its Behinat Nekeva, its He’arah de
Zachar reaches, but it does not expand at all below the Shibolet, as it
lacks Behinat Hamshacha.
(Ohr Pnimi item 24)
72. What are the four divisions of Nekudim?
There is the Keter of Nekudim here, where the Etzem of the Ohr de
Awzen, being Behinat Zachar, has Behina Bet de Hitlabshut, being
Behinat GE de Rosh of the Nekudim. There is also Behinat HB, which
are Behinat AHP that went outside and became HGT, though they are
Behinat Rosh at their Shoresh.
After that there is the Behinat actual Guf of the Nekudim, which is
ZAT. There are two Behinot there too: HGT, considered GAR de VAK,
and NHY, which are the ZON de VAK.
(Ohr Pnimi item 26)
73. What is the meaning of “and the arms of his hands were made
supple,” and not his legs?
The Parsa consists of Behina Bet and Behina Dalet because of the
ascent of NHY to HGT, since Behina Bet that operates in HGT, which
are the SAG, with Behina Dalet, operating in NHY de AK ha Pnimi.

--- PAGE 398 ---
Then the Ohr de Eynaim did not reach ZAT de Nekudim, only the GAR
alone.
However, by the force of the Zivug de AB and SAG, a new Ohr came,
fissuring the Parsa. It canceled the Gevul because it lowered the lower
Hey to her place and Ohr HGT returned and illuminated to NHY as in
the beginning. At that time the lower seven of Nekudim received
He’arat SAG too, thus the Ohr itself is considered Ohr de HGT,
meaning of the SAG.
It is said about that, “and the arms of his hands were made supple,”
but the reception place is considered the Tzipornaim of the Raglaim.
This is Behinat Gevul in the Parsa, ending the SAG from the lower
seven, received because of its fissuring. Thus, from the perspective of
the reception, it is considered Raglaim, and from the perspective of
the Ohr itself, it is considered hands.
(Ohr Pnimi item 28)
74. Where is the distinction of the lower Hey in the Eynaim and the
YHV in the AHP most noticed?
It is most noticed in the GAR de Nekudim , called Rosh ha Bet.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 10)
75. What does it mean that the Tzimtzum was to diminish the Ohr de
Atzilut?
All the degrees were divided by two through Tzimtzum NHY, to GE
and AHP. Only GE remained in the Atzilut of the degree, and the AHP
became the Beria of the degree.
This is what happened in all the degrees until Bina and ZON of Eser
Sefirot de NHY became Behinat “separated Beria”. Thus the Atzilut
was diminished in all the degrees through Tzimtzum NHY.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 14)
76. What is the Parsa?
See answer No. 23 and Answer 79.
77. What is the correction of the Parsa for the purpose of Beria?

--- PAGE 399 ---
Through the Tikun of Parsa in such a way that the lower Hey can
descend to her place, the AHP that came out and became the Beria of
the degree return to the Atzilut of the degree.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 14)
78. What is the difference between Parsa and Sium Raglin?
The Parsa is considered the Sium Raglin of the inner Partzuf. Like the
Parsa inside the intestines of a person separates the breathing, vitality
organs, from the feeding organs, so the Parsa separates SAG above
Tabur from the other half of the Partzuf below Tabur. This is so even
though these two halves are one Partzuf, but the Etzbaot Raglaim are
Behinot Sium for a whole Partzuf.
(Ohr Pnimi item 9)
79. When was the Parsa made?
The Parsa was made after the Masach was incorporated in the Zivug
de Rosh SAG in the Nikvey Eynaim from which it descended to the
place of Tabur. It generated Eser Sefirot de Rosh from Nikvey Eynaim
upward, meaning from Tabur up, called YESHSUT, and the two
Heyin, the First Hey and the lower Hey connected in these Nikvey
Eynaim at the Peh of Tabur.
Then a Behinat Parsa expanded by that connection, generally
considered the Behinat Sium on the GAR. However, she particularly
ends three Partzufim:
1. She ends Nekudot de SAG so that they do not expand to shine below
Tabur once more as prior to Tzimtzum NHY. This is because the point
of Sium de SAG was in her because of the incorporation of the lower
Hey in her.
2. She has the point of Sium on the MA and BON Elyon, which also
came out of the Nikvey Eynaim, though she came out of the Behinot
Reshimot de Taamim de SAG that are not mixed in the lower Hey.
Thus, they too ended on the Parsa.
Because there is Behina Bet de Hitlabshut in them, meaning the
Zachar, whose Koma reaches the Awzen, they are considered SAG,

--- PAGE 400 ---
Behinat AVI.
3. The third is that Rosh ha Aleph, the Behinat GE of the Nekudim,
considered Akudim because the lower Hey in its Eynaim cannot act at
all from below upward.
Thus, the Parsa ends three Partzufim, and the Ohr that descends
below Parsa is but Ohr Achoraim, meaning VAK without GAR.
Hence, the HB de Nekudim are devoid of GAR.
(Ohr Pnimi item 9)
80. What is the fissuring of the Parsa?
Canceling the partition between the GE of the degree and its AHP is
considered the fissuring of the Parsa, meaning the canceling of the
Gevul in it. This is done by lowering the lower Hey to her actual place.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 14)
81. Why is the return of the AHP to the Rosh named after the Parsa?
The diminution of the Ohr de Atzilut, which is the erection of the
degree on the two Sefirot Keter and Hochma alone, and the removing
of the AHP from there, is done by the ascent of the lower Hey to the
Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh ha Aleph. This is because the lower Hey was
associated with the First Hey there, and never descends from there.
However, there are two Tikkunim in the Parsa, extending from this
connection: lowering the lower Hey from the Behinat First Hey, and
returning the AHP to the Atzilut of the degree.
Aleph א is the Behinat “diagonal” in her, meaning the connection is
not fixed in her, but turns this and that way. This is because she is a
branch off the Upper connection in the Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh ha
Aleph, and the branch is not as strong as the Shoresh, making such a
separation in her possible.
The second: there is a concealment force in her, over the lower Hey in
the Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh ha Aleph, so that it does not manifest its
force during the descent of the lower Hey to her place.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 15, 34)

--- PAGE 401 ---
82. Why does the Difference between HaVaYaH de AB and HaVaYaH
de SAG depends entirely on the filling of Aleph in the Vav?
See answer No. 1 here.
83. Is the connection of the two Heyin permanent?
The connection of the two Heyin is permanent, but the difference in
them is only regarding the concealment and the revelation, where at
one time the lower Hey is disclosed, and another time the lower Hey is
concealed, not manifesting its power.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
84. In which Behina of SAG was the Zivug for the Nekudim?
The Masach that was purified from the Guf de SAG consists of two
Behinot Reshimot: Reshimot de Taamim and Reshimot de Nekudot. For
the purpose of Nekudim there was a Zivug on the Behinot Nekudot
incorporated in the Masach, which are the Behinot lower nine de SAG
(see answer No. 66).
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
85. What is the primordial Nekeva of the Olamot?
Malchut de YESHSUT that the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim emanated
from is the primordial female to the Olamot.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
86. Where do BYA stand?
From the place of the new point of Tzimtzum in Bina de Eser Sefirot
de NHY, being the place of Tabur de Nekudim, down to the place of
the point of Tzimtzum Aleph. This is the Malchut of the Eser Sefirot de
NHY de AK, the place of the separated BYA. It is so because Bina is
the place for Olam Beria, the ZA for Olam Yetzira and Malchut for
Olam Assiya.
(Ohr Pnimi item 7)
87. How many fissures were caused by Zivug of AB and SAG?
Two fissures:

--- PAGE 402 ---
• The first whereby the Zivug of AB and SAG a new Ohr descended
and fissured the Parsa, meaning lowered the lower Hey from
there and the Gevul was canceled.
• The second split the walls of the Kelim de AK through the Peh de
Yesod and that new Ohr came to the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim as
well.
(Ohr Pnimi item 16)
88. What is the Shoresh for ABYA?
The Shoresh for the four Olamot ABYA is Olam ha Nekudim.
However, prior to that, there is no Shoresh to the Olamot there since
there hasn’t been the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din
there.
(Beginning of Histaklut Pnimit)
89. Where is the beginning of the association of Midat ha Rachamim
with Din?
In Olam ha Nekudim.
(Beginning of Histaklut Pnimit)
90. Where is the Sium Raglin de AK ha Pnimi?
At Nekuda de Olam ha Zeh.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 1)
91. Which is the fundamental action of all the innovations made in
Nekudim?
The Hitpashtut of Nekudot de SAG into the inner MA and BON de AK
where they connected with the lower Hey. This is the fundamental
action for all the innovations made in Olam ha Nekudim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 5)
92. What is the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din?
The connection of the two Heyin, the First Hey and the lower Hey.
This is called “the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din”,
because Bina is Rachamim and Malchut is Din.

--- PAGE 403 ---
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
93. What is the reason for the association of Midat ha Rachamim with
Din?
The Hitpashtut of the lower nine de SAG inside the Inner MA and
BON de AK caused the connection of the two Heyin together, which is
the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
94. What is the name Mayin Nukvin
After the two Heyin were connected in that Masach, it was called
Mayin Nukvin. It is named after the Nukvin (females) connected in it,
namely Bina and Malchut.
(Ohr Pnimi item 6)
95. Why is Bina called Beria?
Since the ascent of the lower Hey to Nikvey Eynaim onward, when
Bina departed from the degree, Bina acquired the name Beria, from
the word Batei Barai (outskirts).
(Histaklut Pnimit item 26)
96. What is the difference between Tzimtzum Aleph and Tzimtzum
Bet?
Tzimtzum Aleph was only on Behina Dalet, and Tzimtzum Bet was on
Behina Bet too. Also, Tzimtzum Aleph was absolute, while in
Tzimtzum Bet there is the Tikun of the Parsa, which sometimes returns
Behina Bet to Atzilut.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 27)
97. In which Partzuf is there Katnut and Gadlut?
Only in Partzuf BON is there Gadlut and Katnut. The Katnut is when
the lower Hey is in the Eynaim, and the Gadlut is when the lower Hey
descends to her place. However, that matter cannot be seen in the
three Partzufim Galgalta, AB and SAG, where the lower Hey is not
involved.

--- PAGE 404 ---
(Histaklut Pnimit item 28)
98. When was Zivug de AB and SAG made?
After the Ohr that came out of Nikvey Eynaim expanded to its place
and the Atzilut was diminished into merely Keter and Hochma, the
Nekudot de SAG remained above Tabur and couldn’t come down
below Tabur. This whole diminution caused Behinat MAN, and
awakening of the Zivug of AB and SAG, whose Ohr returned and
lowered the lower Hey to her place, splitting the Parsa, and Ohr SAG
expanded below Tabur once more.
(Ohr Pnimi item 14, and Histaklut Pnimit item 17)
99. Why is the new MA the Taamim of Nekudim?
Because those Taamim, meaning the Gadlut that came out on Olam ha
Nekudim was not kept there. Only afterwards the new MA came and
corrected them, and then they existed. That is the reason the Taamim
are named after the new MA.
(Ohr Pnimi item1)
100. Why is Yesod de Elyon, Daat to the Tachton?
The place of the Masach and the Zivug is called Yesod. Hence, the
Behinat lower Hey in the Nikvey Eynaim de Keter de Nekudim is
called Yesod of the Keter.
When Yesod de Keter is above HB, their YHV became Behinat HGT.
However, when Yesod de Keter, which is the lower Hey, extend below
YHV, as Kamatz, then HB return to the Rosh, and YHV that were HGT
now become HBD.
It turns out that through Yesod de Keter, Tifferet, which is Vav,
becomes Behinat Daat. Thus, Yesod de Elyon becomes Daat in the
Tachton because Tifferet is turned into Daat through Yesod de Keter
which extends to the place of the Vav de HB, which is Tifferet.
(Ohr Pnimi item 30)
101. Why does the lower Hey descend from the Eynaim through Zivug
AB SAG?

--- PAGE 405 ---
Because AB never connected with the lower Hey. Hence, when
Mochin de AB are poured to SAG, they lower the lower Hey from the
Eynaim of SAG to the Peh, as the lower Hey is not found in the
Eynaim de AB.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 17)
102. What are the two operations that emerge by Zivug de AB and
SAG?
1. Lowering the lower Hey from the Keter of the Nekudim to her place to
Peh de Nekudim, and returning the YHV to Behinat HBD de Rosh.
2. A new Ohr that extends and fissures the Parsa, expanding to the Inner
NHY de AK and returning Bina and ZON to Atzilut.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 18)
103. Through what were the correction of Tikun Kavim and ten Kelim
in ZAT too?
Through Ibur and Yenika (to be explained in the next part).
(Ohr Pnimi item 40)
104. What are the four steps of the lower Hey before it comes into the
Otiot?
1. From Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh de SAG to Nikvey Eynaim de
YESHSUT, where they permanently connect to Behinot Shoresh to MA
and BON in their Katnut, which is their primary self and Atzmut.
2. From Nikvey Eynaim de YESHSUT to Nikvey Eynaim de Keter de
Nekudim, where there is the Tikun of the Parsa for the Gadlut of MA
and BON.
3. From Nikvey Eynaim de Keter to Peh de Nekudim, as Kamatz under
the Otiot YHV. This is because then the HB return to Behinat Rosh and
YHV become HBD. This is enough for the correction of the Rosh, but
not yet for the ZAT.
4. Its coming from Yesod AK as Nekuda inside the Otiot, meaning
Melafom, which is a Nekuda inside the Vav ו into the HB de Nekudim,
by which the HB mate and beget the lower seven of Nekudim.

--- PAGE 406 ---
(Histaklut Pnimit item 29)
105. How many kinds of Orot operated in Nekudim?
Three Orot:
1. Ohr that came out through the Eynaim, from which comes the primary
Atzmut of the Nekudim, though it is Behinat Katnut de Nekudim.
2. The Ohr that extends through the Zivug de AB SAG that fissured the
Parsa and illuminated to the Nekudim through Yesod de AK. From
here comes the Gadlut de Nekudim. It is considered a mere addition; it
is not considered the Atzmut of the Ohr of the Nekudim.
3. That which extends by Histaklut Eynaim in AHP, which is merely for
the purpose of the Kelim of the Nekudim.
(Items 17, 18, 19)
106. What is the difference between Daat Elyon and Daat Tachton?
The Behinat Vav ו de HB that became the Daat Elyon because the
Kelim de HB are clean from the lower Hey. However, regarding the
Melafom that came to them from Yesod de AK as a Nekuda inside the
Vav, the Daat Tachton Nimshach from there, as it contains the entire
lower Hey, being the Nekuda inside the Vav.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 12)
107. What is the difference between He’arat NHY de Keter and NHY de
AK?
NHY de Keter return only the HB that are clean from lower Hey into
Behinat Rosh. This does not help the lower seven mixed with the
lower Hey whatsoever. However, NHY de AK illuminates the Behinat
Nekuda inside the Otiot, which is the Hitkalelut of the lower Hey, and
from there the lower seven de Nekudim extend.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 13)
108. Where does the Halbasha of YESHSUT begin?
It begins from Tabur de AK ha Pnimi because there is the place of the
descent of the Masach mingled with the lower Hey, extending from
below upward to the Chazeh.

--- PAGE 407 ---
(Ohr Pnimi item 14)
109. Why don’t the Nekudot clothe any of the SAG, from which they
stem?
Since the Masach that purified and rose from the Guf de SAG consists
of two kinds of Reshimot: Reshimot de Taamim, having no Behinat
lower Hey since they did not descend below Tabur de AK, and
Reshimot de Nekudot, mingled with the lower Hey because of their
expansion below Tabur de AK through its Sium Raglin.
Hence, two kinds of Zivugim were made on the Masach. MA and BON
Elyon came out of the Zivug on the Reshimot de Taamim, extending
from Peh de Rosh SAG through Tabur, meaning in the place where
Orot de Taamim de SAG stand. The Eser Sefirot de Nekudim that
clothe from Tabur de AK down came out of the Zivug on the Reshimot
of the Nekudot de SAG, meaning in the place where Nekudot de SAG
stood before they purified. Thus, the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim clothe
and fulfill the Kelim de Nekudot de SAG that were emptied of their
Orot.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 24, and item 31)
110. Where does SAG clothe AB de AK?
Rosh de SAG clothes AB from its Peh down to the Chazeh. Thus, HGT
de AB are Neshama and Mochin in Rosh SAG, and the Taamim de SAG
clothe from Chazeh de AB through Sium Raglin of AB. The Nekudot
de SAG extend below the Sium Raglin of AB, which is below Tabur de
AK ha Pnimi through Sium Raglin de AK ha Pnimi.
(Ohr Pnimi item 1)
111. Why do Nekudim clothe NHY de AK?
See answer 109.
112. Why is the Holam on top of the Otiot?
The lower Hey in the Eynaim de Keter in the form of lower Hey in the
Eynaim and YHV in the AHP. The lower Hey is there as Holam on top
of Otiot YHV. This is because its He’arah does not expand into the

--- PAGE 408 ---
HB, which are Behinot YHV because the Zivug was not made on this
lower Hey, but only on the First Hey.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 9, 10)
113. Why is the Shuruk in the middle?
The Shuruk, called Melafom, is the Ohr of NHY de AK; it is
completely Behinat lower Hey. There is a new Ohr inside it that came
out through Zivug de AB and SAG, which fissured the Parsa. This Ohr
is Behinat Vav ו, which is a son to the YH, being AB and SAG. It turns
out that here the lower Hey is mixed together with the Vav, meaning
they shine together.
(Item 31)
114. Why did Abba take the point of Shuruk?
First the Zivug was made as Histaklut Eynaim de AVI on the Behinat
Nekuda. This Zivug is named after Abba. Afterwards the Masach
purified and there was a Zivug on the Vav that Ima took.
(Item 31)
115. Why are Keter and Hochma once called Holam and Shuruk, and
once Kamatz and Patach?
Holam is considered the beginning of the creation of Keter, which is
the lower Hey in the Eynaim de Keter, above the Otiot (see answer
112). The Shuruk is the Ohr Yesod that AVI took from Yesod de AK for
the purpose of their Zivug.
However, the Kamatz Patach are Behinot Gadlut de Keter and
Hochma. This is because the descent of the lower Hey from Nikvey
Eynaim de Keter under the HB de Nekudim, which returns them to
Behinat Rosh, the Keter is called Kamatz here, being under Otiot YHV.
Also, Hochma is called Patach here, because through its arriving at
the Rosh, the Ohr Hochma opens, called “the opening of the Eynaim”,
and that is why Hochma is called Patach.
(Item 31)
116. Why are Kamatz Patach from the Nekudot under the Otiot?

--- PAGE 409 ---
See answer 115.
117. Which Behina of Kamatz Patach did not break?
This refers to what they have from their beginning, not to what they
received from Sium Raglin.
(Ohr Pnimi item 32)
118. Why are the seven Nekudot in the shape of Yodin?
Because the lower seven come out from Behinot Hitkalelut of the
lower Hey, called Nekuda. Hence the seven Nekudot are in the shape
of Yodin.
(Ohr Pnimi item 48)
119. What is the difference between the Nekuda of Holam and Kamatz,
as they are both Keter?
Holam means that the Nekuda, which is lower Hey, is above the Otiot
YHV. Then they are considered AHP that come out to Behinat Guf,
meaning HGT.
The point of Kamatz means that the lower Hey descended from the
Nikvey Eynaim and came to her place under the Otiot YHV. At that
time the YHV return to the Rosh and become HBD.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 11)
120. What is the main cause for the emergence of Partzuf MA and
BON?
The ascent of the lower Hey to the Eynaim, meaning the connection of
the two Heyin together is the primary cause for the elicitation of
Partzuf MA and BON.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 6)
121. What is the primary cause of a birth of a Partzuf?
The Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 1)
122. How does Ohr Makif appear in the birth of Partzufim?

--- PAGE 410 ---
All the Partzufim and the Neshamot that emanate and come in the
Olamot, all are parts of the Orot Makifim. When all of them manifest
it will be Gmar Tikun.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 1)
123. What mainly operates to emanate a second Partzuf?
The Masach de Tabur which purifies until it ascends to Hitkalelut of
the Zivug in the Rosh. This is the primary operator in the creation of a
second Partzuf.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 3)
124. How many Nekudot of Sium from Tabur to Sium Raglin?
There are three points of Sium: the point of Tabur ends the KHB; the
point of Yesod ends on ZA; the points of Sium Raglin are the force of
Sium of Malchut.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 4)
125. How are there Eser Sefirot from Tabur down, which is only
Malchut?
Since they are ten forces of Sium on the ten Sefirot.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 1)
126. How are there TNHYM below Tabur?
The three Sefirot Hod, Yesod and Malchut, are all merely the
Hitpashtut of Malchut. Netzah and Hod are considered one Sefira.
Hence, the four Sefirot NHYM are all the Hitpashtut of Malchut.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 5)
127. Why are MA and BON below Tabur?
Since they consist of the lower Hey, and the place of the lower Hey is
below Tabur.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 1)
128. Why must MA be associated with the lower Hey?
Since Komat ZA, which is MA and BON, comes out on Masach de
Behina Aleph, and it is known that the Aviut of Behina Aleph is frail,

--- PAGE 411 ---
and the Ohr Zivug that comes out on it has no Hitpashtut below.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 1)
129. Why isn’t there lower Hey in HB de Nekudim?
Since they extend from Behinat Histaklut Eynaim in AHP, which are
YHV without the lower Hey, and the lower Hey remains concealed in
the Eynaim.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 9)
130. What is the reason that GAR de ZA de Atzilut remain in Ima?
As the Partzuf Elyon de MA and BON remains adhesive with the SAG
and is not considered Nekudim, so it has a Partzuf Elyon to the ZA that
remains attached to Ima, not regarded as ZA.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 26)
131. What are the Achoraim de AVI that were cancelled?
The Orot that came during the Gadlut as additions and are not from
their primary essence, are called Achoraim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 32)
132. Why are the lower seven in one Kav?
Because the matter of the Tikun of the three Kavim emerged by the
association of the lower Hey with the First Hey. The beginning of this
Tikun occurred in the Ohr that came out of the Nikvey Eynaim, and
this Ohr did not reach the lower seven de Nekudim, only the GAR.
Hence the lower seven remained without Tikun Kavim, but in a single
Kav, like the previous Partzufim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 38)
133. Where were ZON made?
The lower seven de Nekudim came out by the Zivug de HB on the
He’arat Melafom that they received from Yesod de AK, which are
ZON.
134. Where were the Kelim de Nekudim made?

--- PAGE 412 ---
The Kelim of every Partzuf are made of the Kelim of the Partzuf
Elyon after the Histalkut of their Orot from them. Similarly, the Kelim
de Nekudim were made of the Kelim of the lower nine de SAG that the
Ohr departed from during the Tzimtzum NHY.
(Ohr Pnimi item 38)
135. What does it mean that the Kelim were small?
The two Kelim Elyonim are missing in the Kelim de Guf de Nekudim,
being Keter and Hochma, and they only have Behinat ZAT. However,
the Ohr that reached them had Eser complete Sefirot. Hence, the
Kelim were found to be small and thus broke.
(Ohr Pnimi item 39)
136. What is the need for Dinim and Klipot?
Since the thought of creation is to delight His creatures, and this
thought is not executed except through a conduct of one opposite the
other.
(Ohr Pnimi item 41)
137. What does it mean that the lower Seven are Din and the Ohr that
comes to them is Rachamim?
Because the Kelim were from Behinat ZAT, which are Din, and the
Orot were of GAR, which are Rachamim.
(Ohr Pnimi item 40)
Questions Regarding Cause and Consequence
138. What eventuates from the yearning of Malchut de Ein Sof for
greater Dvekut with the Ohr Elyon?
Three actions eventuate from that:
1. The departure of the Ohr from all four Behinot;
2. A place was made for the Olamot;
3. Kelim de Eser Sefirot de Igulim.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 4)

--- PAGE 413 ---
139. What eventuates from the Histalkut Ohr from all four Behinot?
1. Ohr of Kav de Ein Sof on only three Behinot;
2. The Tikun of the Masach that limits and impedes the Ohr from
expanding in Behina Dalet.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 5)
140. What eventuates from the Masach?
1. Zivug de Hakaa with the Ohr Elyon;
2. Pushing the Ohr that belongs to Behina Dalet, called Ohr Hozer,
backwards.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 6)
141. What eventuates from the Ohr Hozer?
1. Potential and actual reception of the Ohr Elyon, called Rosh and Guf;
2. Rejection of the Ohr Elyon from Behina Dalet that manifests de facto
in Masach de Tabur, which expands into ten forces of Sium, called
Eser Sefirot de NHY, or Eser Sefirot de Sof.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 9)
[For the Creation of Partzuf AB de AK]
142. What eventuates from the Masach de Tabur de Galgalta?
Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi on one another.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 12)
143. What eventuates from the Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi in
Partzuf Galgalta?
1. The Hizdakchut of the Masach until it equalizes with the Behinat
Malchut de Rosh, for renewal in Zivug de Rosh.
2. Hitkalelut of the Masach in the Reshimot de Eser Sefirot de Guf as it
ascends.
3. The concealment of the Reshima de Hamshacha from the last Behina.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 12, 13 and 18)
144. What eventuates from the disappearance of the last Behina?

--- PAGE 414 ---
1. The concealment of Ohr Keter and the diminution of the Koma up to
Hochma.
2. Two Upper Reshimot that became Zachar and Nekeva.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 14, 19)
145. What eventuates from of the two Reshimot Zachar and Nekeva
that rose from the Guf de Galgalta?
1. The ascent of Malchut de Rosh to Hotem de Rosh, which is Behina
Gimel.
2. The Zivug was made there on Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut, meaning on
the Behinat Zachar, extending Komat Keter there, which is not in
Behinat Hitpashtut for Kelim.
3. The Zivug on Behina Gimel was made there, meaning on Behinat
Nekeva, extending Komat Hochma, having Hitpashtut from above
downward to Behinat Kelim.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 15)
146. What eventuates from the two Zivugim of ZON that the Masach
makes in its Hitkalelut in Hotem in Rosh de Galgalta?
1. The renewal of the Aviut in the Masach and the Reshimot until they
are fitting for Zivug de Hakaa with the Ohr Elyon.
2. The appearance of the Aviut de Guf in the Masach and the Reshimot.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 16, 17)
147. What eventuates from the manifestation of the Aviut de Guf in the
Masach and the Reshimot?
1. Their exit from the Rosh and their arriving in their corresponding
Behina in the Hitzoniut of the Guf de Partzuf Galgalta, meaning in
Behina Gimel of the Guf, called Chazeh.
2. That two Zivugim are made there in the place of Chazeh de Galgalta,
of the Zachar and the Nekeva, as is their property in the Rosh.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 19)

--- PAGE 415 ---
148. What eventuates from the two Zivugim that the Masach makes in
the place of Chazeh de Galgalta?
1. That Eser Sefirot de Rosh come out from the Chazeh upward to Peh
de Partzuf Galgalta on Komat Hochma.
2. The Eser Sefirot from the Chazeh down to Behinat Hitlabshut, called
Guf.
3. The Eser Sefirot de Sium expanding from the Masach de Tabur
downward, and end above Tabur de Partzuf Galgalta. This Hitpashtut
RTS is called Partzuf AB de AK.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 20, 21, 22)
[For the Creation of Partzuf SAG de AK]
149. What eventuates from the Masach de Tabur de AB?
Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi on one another.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 12)
150. What eventuates from the Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi de
AB?
1. The Hizdakchut of the Masach until it equalizes with Malchut de Rosh
for renewal in the Zivug de Rosh.
2. The Hitkalelut of the Masach through its ascent in the Reshimot de
Eser Sefirot de Guf.
3. The concealment of the Reshima de Hamshacha from the last Behina.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 12, 13, 18)
151. What eventuates from the disappearance of the last Behina de
AB?
• The concealment of the Ohr Hochma and the diminution of the
Koma up to Bina.
• The two Upper Reshimot that became Zachar and Nekeva.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 14, 24)

--- PAGE 416 ---
152. What eventuates from the two Reshimot Zachar and Nekeva that
rose from Histalkut AB?
1. The ascent of Malchut de Rosh to the Awzen, being Behina Bet de
Rosh.
2. The Zivug on Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut was made there, meaning
on the Behinat Zachar, extending Komat Hochma, which is not in
Behinat Hitpashtut for Kelim.
3. The second Zivug that was made there on Behina Bet, which is the
Behinat Nekeva, extending Komat Bina, having Hitpashtut to Behinat
Kelim.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 15)
153. What eventuates from the two Zivugim de ZON that the Masach
made in its Hitkalelut in Awzen de Rosh AB?
1. The renewal of the Aviut in the Masach and the Reshimot until they
are fitting for Zivug de Hakaa with the Ohr Elyon.
2. The disclosure of the Aviut de Guf in the Masach and the Reshimot.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 16, 17)
154. What eventuates from the manifestation of the Aviut de Guf in the
Masach?
1. Their exit from the Rosh and their arriving at their corresponding
Behina in the Hitzoniut of the Guf de Partzuf AB, meaning in Behina
Bet de AB, called Chazeh.
2. That they return and make two Zivugim there in the place of Chazeh
de AB, like the attribute of the two Zivugim that they made by the
Hitkalelut in the Zivug de Rosh AB.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 19, 24)
155. What eventuates from the two Zivugim that the Masach makes in
the place of Chazeh de AB?
1. That Eser Sefirot de Rosh came out of the Chazeh upward to the Peh
de Partzuf AB on Komat Bina, which is the Behinat Nekeva where the
Kelim of the Partzuf come from. However, there is also Komat

--- PAGE 417 ---
Hochma there from the Behinat Zachar, who has not Hitpashtut for
Kelim.
2. The Eser Sefirot from Chazeh de AB downward that expand in Kli de
Keter de Guf through the Tabur de Partzuf Galgalta. It reaches the
Sium Raglin de Partzuf AB, where this Hitpashtut stops because there
is Ohr Komat Zachar there, which is Hochma.
3. The Hitpashtut of the nine lower Sefirot from Tabur down to Sium
Raglin de Galgalta de AK, called Nekudot de SAG.
4. The Eser Sefirot de Sium that expand by the Masach de Tabur, called
Eser Sefirot de NHY, or Eser Sefirot de Sof of the Partzuf. This
Hitpashtut RTS is called Partzuf SAG de AK.
[For the Creation of Partzuf MA and BON de AK]
Named Olam ha Nekudim or BON
156. What eventuates from the Masach de Tabur de SAG?
Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi on one another.
157. What eventuates from the Bitush de Ohr Makif in Ohr Pnimi de
SAG?
The Hizdakchut of the Masach until it equalizes with Malchut de Rosh
to receive renewal from the Zivug de Rosh.
The second is the Hitkalelut of the Masach in two kinds of Reshimot:
Reshimot that are not connected with the Reshimot de NHY de
Galgalta, called Taamim, and Reshimot that are connected with NHY
de Galgalta, called Nekudot, where the two Heyin, the lower Hey and
the First Hey, are connected.
The third is the concealment of the Reshimot de Hamshacha from the
last Behina.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 12, 13, 18, and 25)
158. What eventuates from the concealment of the last Behina de SAG?
The diminution of the Koma to Behina Aleph. The second is the two
Upper Reshimot that became Zachar and Nekeva.

--- PAGE 418 ---
(Histaklut Pnimit items 14, 15)
159. What eventuates from the two Reshimot ZON that rose in the
Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh de SAG?
The ascent of Malchut de Rosh to Nikvey Eynaim.
The second is that the Zivug on Behina Bet de Hitlabshut was made
there, meaning on the Behinat Zachar that Komat Bina extends on,
which is not Behinat Hitpashtut. This is performed over the two kinds
of the above Reshimot: Taamim and Nekudot.
The third is the Zivug made there in the Behinat Nekeva, meaning on
Behina Aleph that Komat ZA extends on. however, she has Hitpashtut
for Kelim, and this is done on two kinds of Reshimot too: Taamim and
Nekudot.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 15, 30)
160. What eventuates from the Hitkalelut of the Reshimot in the
Zivugim in the Nikvey Eynaim de Rosh de SAG?
1. The renewal of the Aviut in the Masach and the Reshimot that rose
from the Guf de SAG until they are fitting for the Zivug de Hakaa with
the Ohr Elyon.
2. The exit of the Dikna as lower Hey in the Eynaim and the YHV in the
AHP.
3. The disclosure of the Aviut de Guf in the Masach and the Reshimot.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 16, 17, and Ohr Pnimi item 2)
161. What eventuates from the manifestation of Aviut de Guf in the
Masach and the Reshimot?
Their exit from the Rosh and their coming to the corresponding
Behina in Hitzoniut of the Guf de SAG.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 19)
162. What eventuates from the descent of the Masach to its
corresponding Behinot in the Hitzoniut de Guf de SAG?

--- PAGE 419 ---
It elicited three Roshim as it came to three places in the Guf: Chazeh,
Tabur and the Sium de Guf. From the Chazeh to Peh de SAG it elicited
the Eser Sefirot de Rosh de MA and BON Elyon, and its Eser Sefirot
de Guf end at the Tabur. From Tabur to Chazeh de SAG it elicited
Eser Sefirot de Rosh called YESHSUT, or Rosh ha Aleph de Nekudim.
From the Sium de Guf, meaning Tifferet de AK through Tabur, it elicits
the GAR de Nekudim, and all have Zachar and Nekeva. The Komat
Zachar is up to Bina, and the Komat Nekeva is Komat ZA.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 20, 21,22, 24 and 30)
163. What eventuates from the elicitation of the AHP from all the
degrees?
The diminution of Atzilut on Keter and Hochma alone, and AHP of
every degree are considered the Beria of that degree.
Second: a new Gevul of the Sium of the Kav de Ein Sof that rose from
Malchut de NHY de AK, and the emergence of the three Sefirot Bina,
ZA and Malchut de NHY de AK below the point of Tzimtzum. This is
called Tzimtzum Bet.
Third: these three Sefirot below the point of Tzimtzum became the
place for the three Olamot BYA: Olam Beria in the place of Bina,
Olam Yetzira in the place of ZA, and Olam Assiya in the place of
Malchut.
Fourth: the Tikun of the Parsa.
(Histaklut Pnimit items 33, 34)
164. How are the actions connected to one another through cause and
consequence from Tzimtzum Aleph to the end of Olam ha Nekudim
in Katnut?
Because of the yearning for greater Dvekut, meaning for Hishtavut
Tzura with the Ohr Elyon, Malchut de Ein Sof restricted the Behinat
Gadlut of the will to receive. In other words, she did not want to
receive in Behina Dalet. Since Behina Dalet was the entire vessel of
reception for the Ohr Elyon, the Ohr departed from all four Behinot,
and there became a vacant place for the Olamot.

--- PAGE 420 ---
From the Histalkut Ohr from all four Behinot eventuates the Tikun
Masach on Behina Dalet to extend the Ohr on the first three Behinot,
without extending to Behina Dalet.
From the Masach erected on Behina Dalet comes the Zivug de Hakaa
with the Ohr Elyon returning all the parts of the Ohr fitting to come to
Behina Dalet and to its Achoraim, called Ohr Hozer.
Two actions stem from the Zivug de Hakaa and the Ohr Hozer that
ascended:
1. The potential and actual reception of the Ohr Elyon, called Rosh and
Guf, through Tabur.
2. The force of rejection on the Eser Sefirot de Ohr Elyon called Masach
de Tabur, from which expand the ten forces de Sium, called Eser
Sefirot de Sof, or Eser Sefirot NHY.
(From Galgalta to AB)
From the Masach de Tabur extends the Bitush de Ohr Makif on Ohr
Pnimi on one another.
Three actions stem from the Bitush de Ohr Makif on Ohr Pnimi on
one another:
1. The Hizdakchut of the Masach and its coming for renewal in the
Zivug in the Rosh, because of which all the Orot de Guf departed.
2. The Hitkalelut of the Masach in the Reshimot de Guf during its ascent.
3. The disappearing of the Reshima de Hamshacha from the last Behina.
Two actions stem from the concealment of the Reshima de
Hamshacha from the last Behina:
1. The concealment of the Ohr Keter and the diminution of the Koma to
Hochma.
2. The two Upper Reshimot became Zachar and Nekeva.
Three actions stem from the two Reshimot Zachar and Nekeva:
1. The ascent of Malchut de Rosh to the Hotem, which is Behina Gimel
de Rosh.

--- PAGE 421 ---
2. The Zivug that was made there on Behina Dalet de Behinat
Hitlabshut, meaning on the Behinat Zachar, and the Komat Keter that
extends there. It is not in Behinat Hitpashtut to Kelim.
3. The second Zivug that was made there on Behina Gimel, meaning on
the Behinat Nekeva, extending Komat Hochma there, from which
there is Hitpashtut for the Kelim.
The renewal of the Aviut in the Masach and the Reshimot stems from
the two Zivugim of ZON that were made in their Hitkalelut in the Rosh
de Galgalta, until they became fitting for Zivug de Hakaa with the
Ohr Elyon. The second is the manifestation of the Aviut de Guf in the
Masach and the Reshimot.
Three actions stem from the two Zivugim made by the Zachar and the
Nekeva at the place of the Chazeh:
1. The elicitation of the Eser Sefirot de Rosh from the Chazeh upward to
the Peh de Partzuf Galgalta in Komat Hochma.
2. The expansion of the Eser Sefirot from the Chazeh downward, called
Guf, to the Masach of its own Tabur.
3. The Eser Sefirot de Sium that expanded from the Masach de Tabur
and ended above Tabur de Partzuf Galgalta. This Hitpashtut RTS is
called Partzuf AB de AK.
(From AB to SAG)
The Bitush of Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi on one another extends from
the Masach de Tabur de AB (Histaklut Pnimit item 12).
Three actions stem from the Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi:
1. The Hizdakchut of the Masach to equalize with Malchut de Rosh in
order to be renewed in a Zivug that the Orot de Guf depart with.
2. The Hitkalelut of the Masach with Reshimot de Eser Sefirot de Guf
during its ascent.
3. The concealment of the Reshima de Hamshacha from the last Behina.
The concealment of the Ohr Hochma and the diminution of the Koma
to Bina extends from the last Behina de Hamshacha. The second is

--- PAGE 422 ---
that the two Upper Reshimot were turned into Zachar and Nekeva.
The ascent of Malchut de Rosh to the Awzen extends from the two
Reshimot Zachar and Nekeva. The second is that the Zivug was made
on Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut there, which is the Behinat Zachar. It
extends Eser Sefirot in Komat Hochma there, but has no Hitpashtut to
Kelim. The third is Zivug Bet that was made there on Behina Bet,
being the Behinat Nekeva. It extends Komat Bina, which expands to
the Kelim.
From the Behinat Zachar and Nekeva from the two Zivugim made in
the Rosh extend:
1. The renewal of the Aviut in the Masach and Reshimot to make them
fitting for Zivug de Hakaa with the Ohr Elyon.
2. The manifestation of the Aviut de in the Masach and Reshimot.
Their exit from the Rosh and their coming to their corresponding
Behina in Guf de AB, meaning in Behina Bet, called Chazeh, stems
from the manifestation of the Aviut de Guf in the Masach and
Reshimot. Two: they return and make two Zivugim there in Chazeh de
AB, like their attribute that they made in the Rosh.
Four actions stem from the two Zivugim de Zachar and Nekeva made
in Chazeh de AB:
1. Eser Sefirot de Rosh emerge from the Chazeh upwards to Peh de
Partzuf AB on Komat Bina, which is the Behinat Nekeva, from which
there is Hitpashtut to the Kelim of the Partzuf. However, there is also
Komat Hochma there, which is the Zachar of the Partzuf, which has
no Hitpashtut for Kelim.
2. The Eser Sefirot from Chazeh de AB downward that expand in the
Kelim de Keter de Guf through the Tabur de Partzuf Galgalta, where
that Hitpashtut ends.
3. The Hitpashtut of the nine lower Sefirot through Sium Raglin de
Galgalta de AK, called Nekudot de SAG.
4. The Masach de Tabur from which expand the Eser Sefirot de Sium.
This Hitpashtut RTS is called Partzuf SAG de AK.

--- PAGE 423 ---
(From SAG to MA and BON)
Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi extends from the Masach de
Tabur de SAG. The Hizdakchut of the Masach until it equalizes with
Malchut de Rosh extends from Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi to
receive renewal from the Zivug de Rosh there.
The second is the Hitkalelut of the Masach in two kinds of Reshimot:
Reshimot that are not connected with Reshimot NHY de AK ha Pnimi,
and Reshimot that are connected with the inner Reshimot NHY, called
Nekudot. In those the two Heyin are connected together, the First Hey
and the lower Hey.
The third is the concealment of the Reshima de Hamshacha from the
last Behina.
The diminution of the Koma to Behina Aleph extends from the
concealment of the last Behina de Hamshacha. The second is the
turning of the two Reshimot into Zachar and Nekeva.
From the two Reshimot that turned into Zachar and Nekeva extends
the ascent of Malchut de Rosh to Nikvey Eynaim.
The second is the Zivug that was made there on Behina Bet de
Hitlabshut, being the Behinat Zachar, extending Komat Bina from
which there is no Hitpashtut for Kelim. Hence, the Zivug is made both
on the Reshimot de Taamim and the Reshimot de Nekudot.
The third is the second Zivug that created a Behinat Nekeva there,
being on Behina Aleph, over which extends Komat ZA. There is
Hitpashtut for Kelim from it, and that Zivug too was made both on the
Reshimot de Taamim and the Reshimot de Nekudot.
Three actions stem from the Hitkalelut of the Reshimot in the Zivugim
of the Rosh in the Nikvey Eynaim:
1. The renewal of the Aviut in the Masach and the Reshimot that rose
from the Guf de SAG and became suitable for Zivug de Hakaa.
2. The elicitation of the Dikna in the form of lower Hey in the Eynaim
and YHV in the AHP.

--- PAGE 424 ---
3. The manifestation of the Aviut de Guf in the Masach and the
Reshimot.
Three Roshim extend from the descent of the Masach to its
corresponding Behina in the Hitzoniut of the Guf, as it comes to three
places in the Guf: the Chazeh, the Tabur, and the Sium de Guf,
meaning Sium Tifferet de AK.
It elicits the Eser Sefirot de Rosh of the MA and BON Elyon from
Chazeh to SAG, and his Guf ends above Tabur de AK ha Pnimi, and
from Tabur to Chazeh de SAG, Eser Sefirot de Rosh of YESHSUT,
being Rosh ha Aleph de Nekudim. It elicits a second Rosh from the
Sium of the Guf up to Tabur, called GAR de Nekudim, and from the
Sium de Guf downward emerged the Guf de Nekudim, which is ZAT de
Nekudim.
All of them contain Zachar and Nekeva: the Komat Zachar is up to
Bina, and the Komat Nekeva is up to ZA.
The second is the departure of the AHP from all the degrees. Four
actions extend from the departure of the AHP from all the degrees:
1. The diminution of the Atzilut on Keter and Hochma alone, since the
AHP of the degree departed from it, and are considered its Beria.
2. The Tikun of the Parsa.
3. A new Gevul for Sium of the Kav de Ein Sof in the place of Bina de
NHY de AK, where Bina, ZA and Malchut de NHY de AK are found
below the point of Sium of Kav Ein Sof. This is called Tzimtzum Bet.
4. The three Sefirot de NHY de AK that departed below the point of
Tzimtzum Bet became the place for the three separated Olamot called
BYA. Bina became the place of Olam Beria; ZA, the place of Olam
Yetzira; Malchut, for Olam Assiya.
165. What ten actions were taken through the completion of Partzuf
Galgalta de AK?
1. The place where the Tzimtzum was made.
2. The Reshimot that remained after the Tzimtzum.

--- PAGE 425 ---
3. The Eser Sefirot de Igulim.
4. The Masach in Kli Malchut.
5. The Hamshacha of Ohr back.
6. The Zivug de Hakaa with the Ohr Elyon.
7. The Ohr Hozer that became a Levush and Kli for the Ohr Elyon.
8. The Eser Sefirot de Yosher from below upward, which are Rosh de
Kav.
9. The Hitpashtut Malchut de Rosh from above downward in Eser
Sefirot from her and within her through Tabur, which are the Toch of
the Kav.
10. The Hitpashtut of the Masach de Tabur in Eser Sefirot de Sium, where
from Malchut de Sium downwards it is darkness, not Ohr.
166. How are these ten actions connected by cause and consequence?
Four actions extend by the Histalkut Ohr on all four Behinot: the place
for the Olamot; the Reshimot, which are Eser Sefirot de Igulim; the
awakening for the Hamshacha of Ohr back; the Tikun of the Masach.
The Masach causes two actions: Zivug de Hakaa and raising Ohr
Hozer. The Zivug de Hakaa and the Ohr Hozer cause four actions:
Rosh, Toch, Sof, and the point of Tzimtzum that ends the Kav.
167. What are the fourteen actions generally executed in the creation
of a Partzuf?
1. Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi.
2. The Hizdakchut of the Masach.
3. The Hitkalelut of the Masach in the Reshimot de Eser Sefirot de Guf.
4. The two Upper Reshimot: Zachar and Nekeva.
5. Two kinds of Zivugim in the Masach de Rosh.
6. The renewal of the Aviut in the Masach and the Reshimot.
7. The recognition of the Aviut de Guf in them.
8. The concealment of the Reshima of the last Behina from them.

--- PAGE 426 ---
9. Their departure from the Rosh.
10. Their arrival at the Hitzoniut de Guf of the previous Partzuf at the
place of the Chazeh.
11. The Zivug de Hakaa made in the Masach at the place of the Chazeh,
extending Eser Sefirot de Rosh.
12. The Hitpashtut of Malchut de Rosh from the Chazeh downward.
13. Its clothing of the previous Partzuf.
14. Its beginning from the Peh de Elyon.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 11)
168. How are the fourteen actions of the creation of the Partzuf
interconnected?
Bitush de Ohr Makif and Ohr Pnimi causes three actions: the
Hizdakchut of the Masach, the Hitkalelut of the Masach in the
Reshimot, and the concealment of the last Behina.
The concealment of the last Behina causes two actions: two Reshimot
ZON, and two new Zivugim in the Rosh.
The Hitkalelut in the Zivug de Rosh causes the manifestation of the
Aviut de Guf.
The manifestation of the Aviut de Guf causes three actions: the exit
from the Rosh, the arrival at its corresponding Behina in the Hitzoniut
de Guf, and the new Zivug at the place of the Chazeh.
Three actions stem from the Zivug in the Chazeh: Rosh, Toch, Sof.
Two actions stem from the Hizdakchut of the Masach and the
Histalkut of the Orot de Guf: the Halbasha of the Tachton on the
Elyon, and the beginning of the Koma of the Tachton from Peh de
Elyon.
169. What are the two actions added in Partzuf SAG?
The descent of Nekudot de SAG below Tabur de AK ha Pnimi and the
division of the Partzuf into Taamim and Nekudot.
170. What are the thirteen actions added in Partzuf Nekudim?

--- PAGE 427 ---
See Histaklut Pnimit item 31
171. How are the thirteen actions interconnected by the above order of
cause and consequence?
See Histaklut Pnimit items 32 through 35.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 428 ---
PART SEVEN
The Eser Sefirot of the seven Melachim that died
1. * 4
2. 4
3. 6
4. 6
5. 7
6. 9
7. * 9
8. 9
9. 10
10. 11
11. 12
12. 13
13. 13
14. 13
15. 14
16. 14
17. 14
18. 14
19. 14
20. 15
21. 16
22. 16

--- PAGE 429 ---
23. * 17
24. 21
25. 22
26. * 22
27. 24
28. * 25
29. 27
30. 29
31. 29
32. 30
33. 30
34. 31
35. 31
36. 32
37. 33
38. 33
39. * 33
40. 35
41. 38
42. 41
43. 43
44. 43
45. 44
46. 49
47. 50
48. 50
49. * 51
50. 53

--- PAGE 430 ---
51. 55
52. 55
53. 56
54. 56
55. * 56
56. 56
57. 58
58. 59
59. 59
60. 61
61. 62
62. 64
63. 65
64. 65
65. 65
66. 66
67. 67
68. 67
69. 67
70. 67
71. * 68
72. 68
73. 69

--- PAGE 431 ---
1. *Know, that the Shoresh of these Melachim is the name First BON
that emerged from the He’arat Eynaim of AK, called Olam ha
Nekudim. Every Behinat Malchut that exists in all the Olamot was
made of this name BON.
This is so because there is Malchut in Arich, in AVI, and in ZON,
and they were all sorted by the name MA that elicited from the
Metzach of AK, which is the Behinat Zachar. You already know
that there is not a Sefira that does not consist of ten Sefirot. Hence,
each and every Sefira in all the Olamot must have Behinat
Malchut, made of the above Melachim.
Ohr Pnimi
1. The Shoresh of these Melachim is the name First BON.
This means that in Olam ha Tikun they are Behinat Name HaVaYaH
filled with Heyin, which is BON in Gimatria, although they are
Behinat HaVaYaH de SAG in their origin, meaning Nekudot de SAG. It
is as the Rav wrote (Tree of Life; Gate 10), that in the future, when all
these Melachim will be completely corrected, the name SAG shall be
as before and the name MA shall be cancelled. This is the meaning of
the return of the world to Tohu ve Bohu (lit. Unformed and Void). At
that time, there will be only two Orot, AB and SAG.
However, in Olam ha Tikun, the Nekudot de SAG descended and
became the name BON there, meaning a Nukva of the name MA and
subordinate to him. Everything she has, she receives from the Zachar,
which is HaVaYaH de MA. This is why we always name the ZAT de
Nekudim, BON, though they are Nekudot de SAG.
In fact, the Partzuf that emerged by the Zivug in Masach de Behina
Aleph, called the Ohr Eynaim, which is HaVaYaH de MA, means Eser
Sefirot at the level of ZA. However, it is called HaVaYaH de SAG for
two reasons: One, because there is Ohr Zachar there, which came out
on Behina Bet de Hitlabshut, called YESHSUT (see Part 6, Ohr Pnimi
item 14), and Komat YESHSUT is called HaVaYaH de SAG.

--- PAGE 432 ---
The second reason is that the Kelim de Nekudim, which are Behinat
Nekudot de SAG de AK, meaning the lower nine de SAG that
descended below Tabur de AK. The Ohr departed from them and these
Kelim moved to the Eser Sefirot de Olam ha Nekudim (see Part 6, Ohr
Pnimi item 38). For this reason they are called Nekudot de SAG.
Behinat Malchut that exists in all the Olamot was made of this
name BON.
Through the ascent of the Hey Tata’a, namely Malchut, to the place of
the Eynaim, which is Hochma, Malchut mixed and connected to each
and every Sefira of the Eser Sefirot. From then onward, this Malchut
is connected with the First Hey, incorporated in each Sefira and in
each Partzuf (see Part 6 Ohr Pnimi item 38).
2. When the Upper Maatzil began to create the world, He emanated,
created, made, and did the four Olamot ABYA. He began to sort
the four above-mentioned Melachim that died. What was sorted
from Him, rose in the Kedusha of the Olamot, and what was not
sorted remained a Klipa and Sigim.
However, the essence of these Sigim and Melachim, their Shoresh
is the name First BON. It is one Partzuf Adam from its Rosh to its
Raglaim, containing corresponding Klipot from its Rosh to its
Raglaim.
Ohr Pnimi
2. These Sigim and Melachim, their Shoresh is the name First BON.
We must thoroughly understand what these Sigim are and how they
were rooted and come from the name BON.
The thing is that you already know that the Kelim of each Partzuf
come to it from its Elyon. This is so because once the Orot de Eser
Sefirot de Guf de Elyon depart and the Kelim de Eser Sefirot remain
emptied of Ohr, these Kelim move to the Tachton and fill up with the
Orot of the Tachton (see Part 5, Ohr Pnimi item 35, par. “The Rav has
already thoroughly explained”).

--- PAGE 433 ---
Accordingly, you see that the Kelim of the lower nine of Partzuf SAG
de AK that were emptied of their Orot with Tzimtzum NHY de AK are
the very Kelim of the Nekudim de AK, called BON there. It has been
explained in Ohr Pnimi (Part 6 item 1, Sub Header “Its SAG”) that the
lower nine of SAG de AK mixed there with the Behina Dalet that is in
the Kelim de NHY de Partzuf Keter de AK (Part 6 Ohr Pnimi item 38).
Behina Dalet mixed with every single Sefira up to Hochma, and thus
there is a mixture of Behina Dalet in the Kelim de SAG, in each and
every Behina in them. It has also been explained above (Part 6 item 1,
Sub Header “Its SAG”) why the Orot and Kelim of SAG could shine
in the place of Behina Dalet de AK. This is so because there was no
Tzimtzum on the Ohr SAG, being the Ohr of Bina; the Tzimtzum was
only on the Ohr Hochma.
Afterwards, these Kelim moved to the ZAT de Nekudim, and AVI of
the Nekudim mated in Zivug de Gadlut Panim be Panim, and extended
Komat Hochma in their place from below upwards in Behinat Rosh.
After that they dispensed this Ohr Hochma to the ZAT of Nekudim
where the Behina Dalet was mixed in each and every one of their
Behinot.
Thus, that Ohr could not clothe in these Kelim since the Behina Dalet
was already restricted to not receive the Ohr Hochma. Therefore,
when the Ohr extended into the Kli and struck the Behina Dalet that
was mixed in the Kli, it instantly departed and left all the Kelim. Then
the Kli too broke and died because of Behina Dalet in it. It sucked
something from the Ohr before it left there, and this sucking caused a
disparity of form in Behinat oppositeness from the Maatzil, which is
the Light of Life, hence it is called “Death”.
You find that this mixture of Behina Dalet in the Kelim de SAG, which
are Behina Bet, caused a shattering and death in the Kelim. For this
reason this mixture is called Sigim in the Kelim. These are parts in the
Kelim that cannot receive the Ohr Elyon and because of them, the
corruption falls into all the Kelim, even in the parts that were worthy

--- PAGE 434 ---
of receiving the Ohr, namely the Kelim de SAG that are from Behina
Bet.
He says that when He “began to create the world etc. He began to sort
the four above-mentioned Melachim that died. What was sorted from
Him, rose in the Kedusha of the Olamot, and what was not sorted
remained a Klipa and Sigim.” This is because after the Ohr departed
from the Kelim and the Kelim died and fell to the Separated Olamot, to
BYA, the Maatzil returned and sorted the broken Kelim of the
Melachim.
This means that He sorted the Kelim that are worthy for Halbasha of
the Ohr Elyon, which belong to the Kelim de SAG, which are the
Partzufim of Atzilut in the BON part in them. These Sigim that are
mixed in Behina Dalet that were not sorted, remained in BYA within
the Klipot.
Thus, we learn that the Sigim are parts of Behina Dalet that mixed
with the Kelim de SAG. That mixture was rooted in the Kelim de
Nekudim, called BON, as he says, “these Sigim and Melachim, their
Shoresh is the name First BON,” meaning in Nekudim.
Containing corresponding Klipot from its Rosh to its Raglaim.
This is because in general, ZAT are considered one whole Partzuf in
Rosh and Guf. This is because they received the Ohr GAR and the
Rosh from the Zivug of Gadlut de AVI. The entire ZAT broke Panim
and Achor, as it is written below in this Part, and because Behina
Dalet was mixed in every single Behina of the Kelim of the Nekudim.
Because of that there are Klipot in it from its Rosh to its Raglaim,
meaning Sigim that remained inside the Klipot.
3. Even though they are seven Melachim, they are ten, as we say that
they are seven Heichalot, when they are actually ten. This is so
because the first Heichal consists of the first three Sefirot, called
Kodesh Kodashim. The last Heichal consists of two, Yesod and
Malchut, which is Livnat ha Sapir. So it is here, since they are Yod
Sefirot, called seven Melachim.

--- PAGE 435 ---
Ohr Pnimi
3. Though they are seven Melachim, they are ten.
This means that not only do ZAT HGT NHYM of the Katnut contain
Eser Sefirot as well, meaning Eser Sefirot in each contains HGT
NHYM, but they also had a Zivug de Gadlut that have actual GAR,
meaning HBD too.
4. A more elaborate matter is this: We have learned that from these
Melachim, the suitable Behinot were sorted for Atik, AA, and AVI
de Atzilut. However, there was some breaking in their Achoraim.
Not actual death, which is the Klipa, but a lessening of Ohr.
Thus, these Achoraim fell below their place in the Kedusha itself
and do not have actual Sigim, which are death. All the Behinot
Malchut in each Sefira were sorted from these Melachim of the
name BON in the part of ZON de Atzilut. However, some Nitzotzot,
which were not sorted, remained in them and are mixed inside the
Klipot and the Sigim. Hence, in these there is actual death. You
find that all the Klipot cling solely to ZON, not from Ima upwards.
Ohr Pnimi
4. There was some breaking in their Achoraim etc. do not have
actual Sigim.
Interpretation: GAR de Atzilut too were not completely sorted, and the
Achoraim that fell from them during the breaking of the vessels did
not rise to their place completely until Gmar Tikun. However, that
does not give any hold to the Klipot since these Achoraim never left
Olam Atzilut at all, but descended from a high degree to a low degree.
Conversely, ZAT de Nekudim, called ZON, have actual Sigim, as we
have written above. This is why they died and fell to the Separated
Olamot. Thus, because these Kelim were not entirely sorted, but many
Sigim remained inside the Klipot, they have a hold of ZON too, in the
extent that they take their authority from these Kelim de ZAT.
The Klipot cling solely to ZON, not from Ima upwards.

--- PAGE 436 ---
It is written above in the previous item that unsorted parts remained
inside the Klipot only from the Kelim de ZA, and this is why they have
a hold of it. Conversely, nothing fell to the share of the Klipot from
Ima upwards, hence the Klipot have no hold at all from Ima upwards.
5. You know that the Shoresh of ZA is only six Sefirot. However,
afterwards they grew and became Eser Sefirot for it. Similarly, the
Shoresh of Malchut is one Nekuda, which is later made to consist
Eser Sefirot.
Thus, in their first Shoresh they are only seven Melachim, six in
ZA and one in Nukva. These cling to the last two Otiot of The
Name, which are VH, and these two Otiot are eleven in Gimatria.
This is the meaning of the eleven signs of the incense, ten inner
Sefirot, and one Makif. Although the Makif too consists of ten
Sefirot, it is called one.
Ohr Pnimi
5. The Shoresh of ZA is only six Sefirot.
This is so because when it was born, it had no Rosh, which is GAR,
called HBD. He had only VAK, being HGT NHY, and Malchut has
only her Malchut, lacking all first nine Sefirot. Hence, the Sitra Achra
do not have any sucking from the Rosh de ZA, since during the Katnut
it has no Rosh.
As we shall see, these are very interesting things, but here we shall
only elucidate the reason that ZA came out without GAR. Indeed, even
during the Gadlut, it has no more than six Kelim HGT NHY. When the
Rav writes that it has Eser Sefirot, it does not mean that the first three
Sefirot, namely KHB, were added to it, only that its HGT of Katnut
grew to become a HBD, and the NHY de Katnut grew to become a
HGT. All that was added are the three lower Sefirot, being NHY.
Thus, even during the Gadlut it does not attain the first three Kelim
KHB, and because this is a great principle in the wisdom, we must
understand it at its source, each with its own reason.

--- PAGE 437 ---
It is known that the Shoresh of ZA emerged at Nekudim, called
HaVaYaH de BON. This is Partzuf MA, called YESHSUT that came
out of the Nikvey Eynaim. Also, you find a great innovation in this
Partzuf, unlike all the previous Partzufim of AK.
The Gufim emerged in them in Eser Sefirot and Eser Kelim, and each
Guf begins with Kli de Keter, as it is written in Matei ve Lo Matei.
However, in this Partzuf that came out of the Eynaim, the Guf begins
from Daat; there is no memory of the first three Sefirot Keter Hochma
Bina in them.
Besides that, there is a great difference in the Eser Sefirot de Rosh
itself. Until here there is only one Rosh for each Partzuf: the first is
YESHSUT that stands from Tabur de AK upward to the Chazeh; the
second is the Keter of the Nekudim; and the third is AVI de Nekudim.
These two changes are interdependent. It has already been thoroughly
clarified in Part 6 that all these three Roshim are only one Eser Sefirot
de Rosh. The matter of their division in this manner is because of the
ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, where the Zivug was made on
the Masach de Behina Aleph, called Nikvey Eynaim.
The first Rosh came out in two Sefirot Keter and Hochma and in the
Nukva de Hochma, the Zivug was made on the Hey Tata’a
incorporated there, and this Rosh is called YESHSUT. For this reason,
the three Sefirot Bina, ZA, and Malchut, are considered HGT de Rosh,
as they are below the Masach and the place of the Zivug and in that
they are no longer considered GAR.
Nonetheless, these HGT are also considered Rosh. Moreover, they are
the gist of the Rosh of Partzuf Nekudim because the above first Rosh,
called YESHSUT that stands from Tabur AK upward through the
Chazeh does not join the Partzuf at all. Instead, it is regarded entirely
as Akudim (see Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 20), but its Behinat AHP that
exited to Behinat HGT are considered Rosh de Nekudim.
Also, these AHP are divided into two Roshim. This is so because the
Behinat Awzen, called Sefirat Keter de Nekudim is considered Behinat

--- PAGE 438 ---
Keter and Hochma of this Rosh, in the form of Hey Tata’a in the
Eynaim.
The Behinat Hotem Peh that came out of this Rosh too are YHV in the
AHP. They are considered the third Rosh, called AVI de Nekudim.
Know, that the second Rosh too, called Keter de Nekudim, is also not
considered the Rosh of the Partzuf. This means that its Malchut does
not expand from above downward to Behinat Eser Sefirot de Guf since
it only shines and clothes in the third Rosh, meaning AVI de Nekudim.
AVI alone are the Rosh for the Partzuf of the Nekudim. This means
that they Malchut expands from above downward to Behinat Eser
Sefirot de Guf de Nekudim (see above Histaklut Pnimit Part 6, section
Cause and Consequence, item 30).
Know, that even during the Gadlut, when Hey Tata’a descends from
the Eynaim in the Keter to the Peh de Rosh, Keter itself still does not
join AVI in such a way that they will literally be made into one Rosh.
Instead, only He’arat NHY of Keter clothes AVI. This is the meaning
of AVI becoming Behinat HBD, and the second Rosh is in Behinat
Keter above their Rosh.
You see how the Eser Sefirot of one Rosh were divided and made into
three Roshim. The first Rosh took Keter Hochma; the second Rosh
took the Bina in them, called Awzen; and the third Rosh, called AVI,
took the ZAT in them, called Hotem Peh. However, the first two
Roshim do not join the Guf of the Partzuf.
You already know that all the Sefirot de Guf extend from the Rosh.
The full measure that Malchut de Rosh clothes in her Ohr Hozer from
below upward in the Rosh expands from her and within her in that
same amount to Eser Sefirot de Guf.
Yet, understand that Malchut of the third Rosh has no more than the
two Sefirot Hotem Peh, which are ZAT de Rosh. The GAR of Rosh are
in the two previous Roshim because Keter and Hochma are in the first
Rosh, called YESHSUT and Bina is in the second Rosh, called Keter.
Thus we have thoroughly explained that it is impossible for ZON to

--- PAGE 439 ---
have more than seven Kelim HGT NHYM, since their Rosh, being AVI,
have no more than these ZAT, which are Hotem Peh.
We might ask about that: Since both lack GAR, what then is the
greatness of AVI over ZON? The Rav has already explained that to us
above (Part 6 items 21-25). The whole merit of AVI over the ZON is
because AVI took a little bit He’arah from the Ohr Awzen. This is why
their Kelim did not break, and only their ZON did not receive any
He’arah from the Ohr Awzen, but only from the Hotem Peh. This is
why all their Kelim broke.
In general, we have already learned there thoroughly and we shall
explain further in this part that this He’arah that AVI received from the
Ohr Awzen corrected them by means of Zivug Achor be Achor. This
means that because of that they had Behinat GAR of Bina, as we shall
elaborate below.
6. The essence of how they were seven and became eleven is that the
four Achoraim broke from HB and YESHSUT. They were joined
above with these seven Melachim and became eleven. Do not
wonder at how Klipot were made of HB etc. since this is discerned
as what clothes in ZON below to become Mochin for them, and
that Behina is considered actual ZON.
7. *Let us complete the scrutiny regarding the primary reason and
what it was. His intention is to create this world, which contains
reward and punishment. This is impossible except through an
officer, which is the measure of repaying the evil. Also, the evil is
the Shoresh of the Sigim and the Shmarim of the Gevurot and the
Dinim, as it is written, “in the place of justice, that wickedness was
there.”
Ohr Pnimi
7. “In the place of justice, that wickedness was there.”
This refers to the sentence of the Sitra Achra that is turned into harsh
and bitter Dinim, as it is written, “His ordinances, they have not
known them.” Now you can understand the words of the Zohar

--- PAGE 440 ---
(Truma, p.164), “The Sitra Achra is given an extra count, and it is
counted as a deficit, such as eleven.”
This is the evil attribute to repay the evil, since the Sitra Achra is
given more power to hold than they deserve. In that, “a whirling
storm; it shall whirl upon the head of the wicked,” and this is what our
sages imply, “A camel that went looking for horns, its ears were cut
off.”
8. The Sigim and the Klipot cannot appear except through a
concatenation of Olamot. In the end, the Sigim will be sorted and
manifest, and all this was through the death of these Melachim. All
of them are strong Dinim, named BON, which are Gevurot.
This is so because all these are Behinot Nekudot, being Nekevot
and Behinot Ohr Hozer, Mayin Nukvin. The Tzura of the Nekudot
is Nitzotzot and they are the strong Nitzotzin mentioned in
Parashet Pekudei, “Come and see, the Rosh of the beginning of
the faith inside the thought. It hammered a strong spark and
educed Nitzotzin.”
Ohr Pnimi
8. Behinot Nekudot, being Nekevot and Behinot Ohr Hozer, Mayin
Nukvin.
Malchut is called Nekuda. This is named after the root Malchut over
which there was the first Tzimtzum, called The Middle Point. Hence,
the Malchuyot and the Nekevot in all the Olamot are called Nekudot,
since they are the subject of the Tzimtzum and the Masach over which
the Zivug de Hakaa with the Ohr Elyon occurred.
He writes, “through the death of these Melachim. All of them are
strong Dinim,” etc. These are Behinot Nekudot, which are Nekevot and
Ohr Hozer and MAN. It is so because these three are one matter,
meaning the Behinot of the Masach that raises Ohr Hozer and unite
and copulate the Partzufim Elyonim when they rise to MAN from the
sorting of BYA. The explanation to this matter will be brought below.

--- PAGE 441 ---
9. The thing is that these seven Melachim are the Behinat Gevurot
that emerged in the world first, as it is written, “In the beginning
God created.” Afterwards He associated Midat ha Rachamim with
it “in the day that the Lord God made” so that the world could
exist and not return to Tohu ve Bohu, as it is written, “Now the
earth was unformed and void.”
After he says, “In the beginning God created,” which are the
seven Melachim, there are seven words corresponding to them in
the verse “In the beginning.” The name HaVaYaH is the Hassadim
and is the eighth Melech, called Hadar, which is the Upper Hesed,
as mentioned in the Idra, and this is the name MA.
It is known that the name MA is in Hassadim, and the name BON
in Gevurot. All are hard Dinim from which Sigim the Klipot came
out through their death and fall, in the form of the dust of the
Upper Earth.
That dust that will be in the ground of the Mishkan (lit.
Tabernacle), Olam Beria, where they were sorted as in a man in
the grave. This is because Beria under the Mishkan is Malchut de
Atzilut and these strong Nitzotzin are thrown there, as it is written
in Parashat Pekudei, “Throws Nitzotzin in every direction and
sorted the waste from within the thought.”
Thus, throwing these Nitzotzin down to Beria is to sort out the
waste and the Klipot that were in potential in the Upper thought,
and have now been executed. As the Nitzotzin that the craftsman
beats with his hammer instantly quench, so these Nitzotzin
quenched and died and returned to the dust, and then they were
sorted.
Ohr Pnimi
9. the Behinat Gevurot that emerged in the world first, as it is
written, “In the beginning God created.”
This refers to what our sages have written, “In the beginning it came
up in the thought to create the world in Midat ha Din. Saw that the

--- PAGE 442 ---
world does not stand, preceded Midat ha Rachamim and associated it
with Midat ha Din.”
We have already discussed it at length (Part 4, Chap 1, Ohr Pnimi item
4), and it explains there that the first three Partzufim de AK had only
one Kli from the Behinat Malchut, being Midat ha Din, hence they
had only one Kav. In order for the world to exist according to His
wish to do good to His creatures, this can only be depicted in the form
of a conduct of reward and punishment, by way of Ten Utterances,
and the Tikun of the three Kavim, Hesed, Din, and Rachamim.
This was done by the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din,
meaning the association of the First Hey, called Midat ha Rachamim,
namely Bina, with the Hey Tata’a, called Midat ha Din, which is
Malchut. The beginning of this association is made in the Zivug of the
Rosh SAG for Olam ha Nekudim in the form of ascent of Hey Tata’a
to the Eynaim and YHV in the AHP.
This is sufficient only for Tikun Kavim in GAR, but in ZAT there was
still no Tikun Kavim. For this reason the Kelim of the ZAT broke and
fell to BYA, as written there at length.
The association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din in the GAR was not
enough to correct the ZAT entirely, meaning from Behinat Hassadim
too. Nonetheless, the association in GAR de Nekudim did help to
correct the ZAT in the Behinot Gevurot. Although the Kelim de ZAT
broke and fell to BYA, still, Nitzotzin came down with them to revive
the Kelim.
Know, that these Nitzotzin mean the Tikun of the Gevurot to be ready
to receive the Hassadim afterwards, when they are sorted, and rise
from there to Atzilut as MAN. He writes, “these seven Melachim are
the Behinat Gevurot that emerged in the world first, as it is written, ‘In
the beginning God created.’”
This refers to the Tikun of the Gevurot to be fitting for sorting and to
raise them as MAN to receive the Hassadim of the new MA. They are
implied in the words, “In the beginning God created,” as the name
God indicates Gevurot.

--- PAGE 443 ---
He associated Midat ha Rachamim with it “in the day that the
Lord God made.”
This refers to the verse, “These are the generations of the heaven and
of the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God
made earth and heaven” (Genesis 2; 4). The name HaVaYaH (lit. Lord)
implies Hassadim, which is Melech Hadar, called the new MA.
They cause a Zivug Elyon there through raising MAN from the sorting
of the Nitzotzin and the Kelim in BYA to the Atzilut, and receive the
He’arat Hassadim of the new MA. At that time the desired association
of Midat ha Rachamim with Din is over, meaning by that the Tikun
Kavim is completed in ZAT too, and all this will be explained
elaborately in its place.
10. It is written in Idrat Nasso (p. 131), “Some were corrected and
some were not corrected.” This does not mean that there are some
Melachim among them that were corrected and some that were
not corrected. Rather, it means that some were sorted and
corrected from them, from the actual Melachim themselves, from
each and every part of them, and that a part of them in each and
every one of them was not corrected and remained below.
Ohr Pnimi
10. “Some were corrected and some were not corrected” etc. a part of
each and every one of them was not corrected and remained
below.
It is a Partzuf of one Adam, having corresponding Klipot from its
Rosh to its Raglaim, meaning opposite all five Partzufim de ZON de
Atzilut. These five Partzufim that were sorted and became Olam
Atzilut, each of them left parts of it that were still not sorted, but are
destined to be sorted by raising MAN from the work of the righteous
throughout the six thousand years of Olam ha Tikun.
Know, that remains of the above Partzufim de Atzilut that remained
unsorted are the entire good reward awaiting the righteous because the

--- PAGE 444 ---
world was created in ten utterances, meaning the ten Kelim de Atzilut
in Behinat association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din.
It is by that that the conduct of reward and punishment was made in
the world, and this is because of the two states of ZON, Katnut and
Gadlut. By doing good deeds they raise MAN to ZON, by which it
attains the Gadlut and GAR, and the Rachamim appear.
If they do bad deeds, by that they cause ZON to return to the state of
Katnut and a conduct of Din manifests in the world. It is also the same
for each and every individual, relating to one’s own Neshama. Yet,
here you should understand that there is no absence in the spiritual,
much less in Atzilut, where He is One and His name One.
The matter of Mochin de Gadlut and Katnut that travel back and forth
in ZA de Atzilut by the actions of the Tachtonim, does not mean that
when the Mochin de Katnut is absent, the previous Mochin de Gadlut
vanish. Rather, there is only an addition here, as the previous Mochin
de Gadlut that were extended through the work of the righteous
remain for ever, unchanged at all by the bad deeds of the wicked.
Instead, the wicked caused a Behinat new Mochin to be made,
additional to the previous Mochin, though the conduct of the world is
always through the Mochin that is added last. Thus, the chain of time
we find in this world, in terms of past and present, extends to us from
the Elyonim, from the Pnimiut and Hitzoniut.
The past extends from the Pnimiut, and the present extends from the
Hitzoniut. The Hitzoniut is always apparent to us in this world, and the
Pnimiut is hidden from us and does not serve us at all, but is destined
to appear before us in the future, at Gmar Tikun.
This is the meaning of “Righteous have no rest, not in this world and
not in the next world.” This does not refer to the next world after they
die, as it is known, “Set free among the dead.”
Instead, some righteous are awarded the Orot of the next world in
their life. Our sages tell us that even those great righteous that have
already been awarded the next world in their life have no rest. Instead,

--- PAGE 445 ---
they must labour in the Holy Work and always come in Behinat
Achoraim that precede the Panim in order to raise MAN to a new,
higher Mochin.
This is so because there is sorting in the Partzufim de GAR de ZA too,
above the Orot of the next world. This is the meaning of the Partzufim
of the Neshamot being destined to clothe up to Komat AK de Assiya.
At that time they will equalize the Koma of the Hey Partzufim de AK,
and this will be explained in its place.
The matter of this Halbasha, that the Neshamot are awarded clothing
the Partzufim Elyonim means the good reward, that is hidden for the
righteous in the future. Because of all the Mochin, extended by raising
MAN that they raise by the good deeds that they do, though afterwards
they come in Behinat Achoraim and cause Katnut in ZON again, we
see that the previous Mochin de Gadlut are not absent. Instead, they
come as Pnimiut.
Hence, they have a way of always extending new Mochin. The first
Mochin come to them in Pnimiut, in a way that they extend a higher
Mochin every time.
Also, all these Mochin that were drawn to the Partzufim Elyonim
through the MAN that they raised, all these belong to their share.
Though in the present they enjoy only the last Mochin that they have
extended, the previous Mochin remain forever. However, they do not
use them in the present, so that they will be able to increase strength
and go from strength to strength. In the future, they will all acquire all
these Mochin that were drawn by them at once.
This is the meaning of what our sages said, “The Creator is destined to
impart every righteous 310 worlds, as it is said, ‘That I may cause
those that love Me to inherit substance, and that I may fill their
treasuries’” (end of Masechet Okatzin). It means that the Mochin that
they have extended in the Olamot Elyonim is their share in their
future.
11. The thing is that of these 288 Nitzotzin of the Melachim that died
and descended to Olam Beria, when the Tikun of the eighth

--- PAGE 446 ---
Melech, Hadar, came, he began to sort out the Nitzotzot and the
Kelim from them too. Everything that it sorted of them was only
the Nukva parts in all the Partzufim. In the beginning, the selected
and the best of them was sorted and rose in Atzilut.
12. There are also degrees in Atzilut itself. First, through the above
mentioned Ibur Elyon, they began to sort the best among them, of
which Nukva de Atik was made.
After the Ohr Nitzotzot of the 288 Nitzotzot was mixed with the Ohr
of Nekudat Keter that remained in Atzilut and the Kelim of the
Melachim mixed with the new Kelim of the new MA, all that was
made into Nukva de Atik and Atik. It is so in all the others too.
Afterwards, through the Zivug de Dechura de Atik with Nukva,
they raised and sorted Nitzotzot that fell below, the fitting part, to
Nukva de Arich and entered in the place of the Ibur in the form
Mayin Nukvin. There they sweeten and correct by being there for
the time of the Ibur and become Behinat Partzuf.
13. Likewise, Arich sorted for Nukva de AVI and AVI for ZON, the
entire Behinat Malchut in them. This is why these are called
Melachim, since all the Malchuyot were made of them.
Similarly, every Yod Sefirot themselves in each and every Partzuf
were sorted in the above-mentioned order. What could not be
sorted and rise in Olam Atzilut even for the bottom Nukva de ZA,
remained in Beria. Later on, all the parts of Beria were made of
them, in its order of degrees.
The Nitzotzot of Beria cannot be sorted by AVI de Atzilut since they
cannot rise above ZON. Instead, they are sorted in Beten of Nukva
de ZA through the Zivug of ZA with it.
However, there too only Behinat Atik de Beria is sorted, and there
Arich de Beria is sorted, and AVI de Beria are sorted in Arich, and
likewise always. This is so because it is impossible for any part to
be sorted above the place of its degree, not in place and not in
time. They are only one after the other in both order of degrees

--- PAGE 447 ---
and the order of the time of their Tikun, and this is elaborated
sufficiently.
14. See regarding Ibur ZA, how it is impossible to open the grave
without blood when it is born. These are the parts called Sigim in
comparison with Atzilut. These Sigim and blood return to be
sorted in Beria, that which Beria evaluates as Sigim, returns to be
sorted in Yetzira etc. similarly in each degree, and this is enough.
Afterwards it is likewise with the worse in Yetzira, and after that
with the worst of all in Assiya, also according to its degrees. This is
so because all the parts of these three Olamot BYA are Behinat
Nukva; there is no Dechura among them at all. Even the Dechurin
(pl. for Dechura) among them are but forces of the Nukva, since
they are all soldiers and armies of the Malchut, and all were made
of the sorting of the seven Melachim as we have mentioned.
15. Also, all the creatures and the Neshamot of the righteous are all
from the sorting of these Melachim. They are sorted daily by our
prayers and rise up as Mayin Nukvin. Then they are corrected and
come to the world.
This is the meaning of, “All of Israel are children of Melachim,”
and this is the meaning of, “Messiah Son of David doth not come
until all the Neshamot in the Guf perish,” being the Guf that is
mixed of good and evil. Also, all the angels and all the creatures in
heaven and in earth, all came from these scrutinies.
16. After every thing that was made to create the four Olamot ABYA
had been sorted, Adam ha Rishon was created to complete and
examine through his actions and Mitzvot.
By the power of the Mitzvot and the prayers to scrutinize the
scrutinies these Melachim were joined in the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Bad in their Sigim. Then he too died and his entire
offspring after him, to sort his parts that were mixed with good
and bad like the Melachim.

--- PAGE 448 ---
This is the meaning of reincarnation, as it is explained in its place.
For this reason there are angels that die and are renewed every
day, as it is written, “created His servants,” etc. This is enough for
the understanding for the pen fails to specify every thing.
17. After all these scrutinies that was scrutinized during the creation
of the Olamot ABYA, most of the Sigim in them had still not been
sorted, as the good leaves and the little good remains with the
completely evil. Every day the good is sorted and leaves, and the
evil remains.
Hence, these parts that were not sorted before the creation of
Adam ha Rishon and had to be sorted by Mayin Nukvin that Adam
will raise through his actions, these were the Behinat Sigim and
Klipot. They were also as it is mentioned in ABYA since the better
part in them were the constituents of Sigim in Atzilut of the Klipot.
This too is according to the degrees Atik and Arich etc. and the
worst in Beria of the Sigim, and that too through her degrees etc.
similarly through Assiya.
18. Indeed, you should know that when these Sigim were sorted and
the Behinot four Olamot ABYA were made of them, they are
complete Sigim and Klipot. All the Behinot Melachim that could
not be sorted were placed inside them in Behinat Neshama and
sustenance in them, reviving them, as mentioned in Parashat Itro
p. 69, “There is no Sitra Achra that does not have a minute Light.”
This is the meaning of the pursuit of the evil inclination and the
Sitra Achra to cause the righteous to sin and to cling to Kedusha,
as they have no sustenance besides that. When Kedusha and
goodness increase, their lives increase. Now you should not
wonder why the evil inclination is in pursuit of Adam to cause him
to sin.
19. Everything that we always sort in our prayers from the day of
Adam’s creation to the days of the Messiah, everything is from
those Behinot of the Melachim placed inside the Klipot. There are
Behinot that are sorted every day, even now, which concern

--- PAGE 449 ---
Atzilut, there are for each Olam in BYA, and there are for the
Neshamot and so on in every item.
When all the sustenance and goodness completes its exit from
them and complete Sigim are left, it is then written, “He will
swallow up death for ever.” These are Sitra Achra, called death
because they are the Sigim of the dead Melachim, and keep that. It
is as we have written about Son of David, that he doth not come
before all the Neshamot in the Guf perish.
20. Indeed, you should know that as they are four Olamot ABYA in
Kedusha and their Shoresh is only Eser Sefirot that expand in
them sort-by-sort and degree-by-degree, so it is in ABYA de Klipot.
They are all rooted in the sorting of the Melachim that could not
be sorted, and they are eleven Sefirot.
It is written in the Zohar (Parashat Truma p.164), “The Sitra
Achra is given an extra count, and it is counted as a deficit, such
as eleven.” It means that when it is given the extra count, it is a
demerit, since they are ten in Kedusha and eleven in the Klipot.
This is so because while they are eleven, they are only nine, since
these eleven are seven Behinot, seven Melachim, and two
Achoraim de AVI, which are only nine. However, in the division of
AVI into two Behinot they will have four Achoraim, and then they
will all be eleven Behinot.
Ohr Pnimi
20. “The Sitra Achra is given an extra count, and it is counted as a
deficit, such as eleven.”
He brings evidence to his words above when he says that in general,
ABYA de Klipot are eleven Sefirot vis-à-vis the general ABYA de
Kedusha, which are Eser Sefirot. He explains that the reason they
number eleven is because they are from the residue of the Sigim that
were not sorted.
There are eleven Behinot in this matter, which are seven Melachim
and four Achoraim, de AVI and YESHSUT, which are eleven, as it is

--- PAGE 450 ---
written, “Where are their gods, the rock in whom they trusted.” These
are the very eleven days from Horev through Mt. Seir, and this is the
meaning of the eleven signs of the incense. Since they are the entire
sustenance in the Klipot, when they are burnt, the vitality of the Klipot
rises upwards, the Sigim and the death are cancelled, and the plague
stops.
The Rav does not come down to interpret the words of the Zohar here.
However, since there is a great secret in their words, the text should be
brought complete and be somewhat interpreted. It says, “The Sitra
Achra is given an extra count, and it is counted as a deficit, such as
eleven. It is as we have stated that in every place where letters are
added, such as here, it is a demerit, such as your brothers have said,
that they said enough, and on the side of Kedusha, he reduced a letter,
and it is an addition,” thus far its words.
Interpretation: The whole of the Sitra Achra is from the breaking of
the vessels, as the Rav says, that there are eleven Behinot. It is known
that their Tikun is in the form of the twelve Partzufim of Kedusha, as
the entire Tikun of the breaking of the vessels is in the twelve
Partzufim of Atzilut. Through them, the Sitra Achra is gradually
annulled until “He will swallow up death for ever.”
He says, “The Sitra Achra is given an extra count, and it is counted as
a deficit.” This is so because a “count” is a name for Malchut, and
Malchut de Sitra Achra is considered an extra count. [Written aside in
the manuscript of the author: “Count” means wisdom; “Extra” means
adding, by way of “All who adds, subtracts.”].
This is the meaning of Malchut without a crown, which are nine and
not ten since they have no sucking from the Keter. A Crown is Keter.
Hence, they are in impudence, in the form of “Malchut without a
Crown”. They are the evil eye, in the form of, “Ninety nine die of evil
eye, and one from other diseases.”
He says, “such as eleven,” meaning all who adds, subtracts. They add
seventy to the eleven [Written aside in the manuscript of the author:
and the Partzuf Elyon of the twelve departs, which is Ein Sof and

--- PAGE 451 ---
Keter] and are left only in the eleven. [Written aside in the manuscript
of the author: eleven because they cancel and break and fall to the
authority of the Klipot. This is the meaning of the tree shouting, “Do
not touch me,” because in the touching of the Ayin in the eleven it falls
to the Klipot.] This is so because they have no sucking in Keter.
This is the meaning of, “in the side of Kedusha he diminished an Ot
and it is an addition. It means that the Ayin is reduced from the eleven
and the combination of Kedusha comes out in the addition since it
becomes twelve. Understand that in addition to the Rav’s words and
with the rest of the words of the Zohar there.
21. You find that the Melachim that remain from the sorting are the
very sustenance of the Klipot. They are called “Multimple
Authorities” since they are separated and are not connected, as
they have not been corrected yet. These are eleven days from
Horev to Mt. Seir, and they are the Melachim that ruled in Mt.
Seir, which is Edom.
They are the ones who said, “Where are their gods, the rock in
whom they trusted,” and these are the eleven signs of the incense
that rise upward when they burn. They depart from within the
Sigim, called death, and then the Sigim and the death are
cancelled and the plague stops.
22. These eleven signs of the incense are but one Behina, which is the
Noga around it, and corresponds to it in Yetzira, in Beria, and in
Atzilut. This Klipa de Noga is called “Ruach Elokim Merachefet”
(lit. the spirit of God hovered). Its Otiot are Mem, Tav – Peh, Reish,
Het (תײתפרײמ).
These are the 288 Nitzotzin of the Melachim that died and this
Klipa is made of the 288 Nitzotzin that remained inside the Kelim
and were not sorted. It hovers over the Klipot and does not enter
them.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 452 ---
22. The Noga around it, and corresponds to it in Yetzira, in Beria, and
in Atzilut.
Know, that ABYA de Klipa are the opposite from ABYA de Kedusha.
This is so because in Kedusha, all that is higher is more Holy, and
every thing that lessens, its Kedusha descends to the Sof of Assiya.
Conversely, in the Klipot, the highest Klipa opposite Atzilut is weak
and not so bad, and the lower it descends the stronger are the impurity
and the Klipot.
Also, there is a difference regarding the mixture of good and bad in
Klipat (Klipa of) Noga, meaning in the Behinat Sigim that were not
sorted. In Assiya it is mostly bad, where they father every impurity,
meaning the impurity of the dead.
The Klipot de Yetzira are mixed good and bad, half each, and she
defiles the weekdays too, as Olam Yetzira is the pure weekdays. In the
Klipot de Beria the mixture is mostly good and some bad. It defiles
only the Truma (lit. Contribution) because Olam Beria is Behinat
Truma.
Olam Atzilut is mostly good and there is a little bit of Klipa in it.
However, even that little bit is not mixed with the Kedusha. The
Kedusha de Atzilut has no impurity, but disqualifies the Kodashim, as
Atzilut is Behinat Kodashim.
“Ruach Elokim Merachefet” (lit. the spirit of God hovered). Its
Otiot are Mem, Tav – Peh, Reish, Het (מײתפרײת).
It means that the Nitzotzin are Behinot Reshimot from the Orot that
fled from the seven Melachim and died. The Reshimot descended with
them so that they would have the strength for the revival of the dead.
Also the Otiot Reish, Peh, Het (288) and Peh, Reish, Het (fled) are the
same, and understand that.
23. *Know, that there are four Behinot in Olam Atzilut, in how the
Zachar and the Nekeva are situated there, whether they are in
Behinot Nekudot prior to the Tikun, or when they are in Behinot
complete Partzuf after the Tikun.

--- PAGE 453 ---
This is their arrangement: the worst is both being Achor be Achor.
Above it is Achor be Panim. This means that the Zachar will turn
its Achoraim facing the Panim of the Nekeva, as now the Nekeva
can receive the Ohr from the Achoraim of the Zachar, through her
Panim. However, she still does not have the strength to receive
from the Panim of the Zachar.
Above it, it is Panim be Achor. This means that the Zachar turns
his Panim facing the Achoraim of the Nekeva and shines in her.
There is greater merit in that since the Ohr of the Panim of the
Zachar themselves shine in the Nekeva, though she still does not
have the strength to receive it through the Panim. For this reason
she turns her Achoraim and receives the Ohr in the Panim
themselves through there.
By so doing, the Ohr becomes a little thicker there, and when the
Ohr passes through the Achor and reaches the side of her Panim,
she will be able to receive it, since it became a little more Av. This
is the meaning of, “a wise will better her in the back (Achor).”
When the Panim of the Hochma, being the Zachar, look in the
Achoraim of the Nekeva and shine in her, he will better her and
shine in her additional He’arah, more than if they were the
opposite, which is Achor in Panim, which is the second degree.
Ohr Pnimi
23. Four Behinot etc. the worst is both being Achor be Achor.
These four degrees apply both in ZON and in AVI, though they
originate in AVI. Since they are the first elements to understand the
Mochin de AVI and ZON, it is appropriate to elaborate and explain
them thoroughly.
It has been explained (Part 6) that Rosh de Nekudim, called AVI, are
only Behinat Hotem Peh de Rosh compared to the Eser Sefirot of the
general Rosh. From the perspective of the second Rosh, they are
Behinat AHP that went outside the Rosh because the Hey Tata’a is in
the Eynaim de Keter. Thus, AVI are found below the Masach de Rosh,

--- PAGE 454 ---
for which they are considered HGT (Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 44, sub-
header “Ot Yod”).
You must know that even though we have said that these AVI are
Behinat HGT, they are still considered Behinat GAR and Rosh from
the perspective of Bina, by the Tikun de Achor be Achor in them. This
Tikun extends from the Bina de Ohr Yashar since the Bina de Ohr
Yashar is Ohr de Hassadim, not Hochma, by way of “because He
delighteth in mercy” (as the Rav has written above, Part 6 item 41 and
Ohr Pnimi item 40, par. “The Panim and Achor”).
Hence, it is considered that her Achoraim reject Hochma and her
Panim is only Ohr Hassadim. It follows, that the Hochma and Bina de
Ohr Yashar are in Achoraim to each other (see above Part 1, Chap 1,
Ohr Pnimi item 50).
It has been explained above in the Rav’s words (Part 6 item 24) that
AVI took some He’arah from the Ohr Awzen, meaning the Ohr Bina
of the Eser Sefirot of the general Rosh. Hence, the Achoraim de Ohr
Bina helped to sustain them in Behinat GAR.
Although they are below the Masach de Rosh at Nikvey Eynaim de
Keter, and this Masach, which is the Hey Tata’a, prevents the He’arat
Hochma of the Rosh from them, it is still not considered a flaw for
them at all. It is so because in any case, they do not want to receive
He’arat Hochma at all, as they specifically crave and want Hassadim.
They reject Hochma by the force of the Achoraim that rides on them
and imprints that desire in them, in the form of “because He delighteth
in mercy.”
Now you can thoroughly understand the Rav’s words there (Part 6,
item 25) that the ZAT that did not receive anything from the He’arat
Awzen, and because of that the Kelim broke Panim and Achor.
However, AVI, which received some He’arah from the Ohr Awzen did
not break, only their Achoraim. Their Panim sustained and did not
break although they took He’arat Ohr Awzen in remoteness of
location.

--- PAGE 455 ---
Now you can thoroughly understand the matters. It has been explained
that through the He’arah that they received from the Achoraim de Ohr
Awzen, they were not at all blemished from the remoteness of location.
This means that they have departed from the Behinat Rosh, by the Hey
Tata’a in the Eynaim de Keter that prevents He’arat Hochma de Rosh
from them.
This is so because they have no wish for Ohr Hochma. Even if they
had been at a near location, they would still reject the Ohr Hochma
from them, as they are in Achoraim with it. For this reason they still
have Behinat complete Rosh from this Behina de Bina, and this is why
the flaw of the breaking did not govern them at all in this Behina. It
means that the Kelim de Panim sustained entirely, namely the Panim
de Bina, which is Ohr de Hassadim.
Only what they later received in their Kelim de Achoraim through the
Zivug de Yesod AK, by which Zivug they turned their Kelim de
Achoraim and made them into Behinat Panim, meaning received
He’arat Hochma in them, only these Kelim broke (see Part 5, item 40,
par. “The Panim and Achor”). This is because they had already been
blemished by the remoteness of location and have become Behinat
Guf.
The Rav says above that if AVI had not begun in Behinat Achor be
Achor, they would have broken like the ZAT of the Nekudim. It means
that through this Tikun of Achor be Achor, which is the He’arat Ohr
Awzen, they are considered Behinat Rosh, being below the Masach de
Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim. For this reason the breaking does not
govern them.
However, if that Tikun of Achor be Achor had not been in them, they
would have been considered actual Guf, like the ZAT de Nekudim, as
both are only Behinat Hotem and Peh (Ohr Pnimi item 5, par. “We
might ask”).
Thus we have thoroughly clarified the matter of the Achoraim de Ima
with respect to Hochma. Yet, Abba too is considered to be with his

--- PAGE 456 ---
Achoraim toward Bina because of the Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey
Eynaim of the Keter.
Consequently, Abba cannot dispense Bina any Behinat Hochma, as he
is below the Masach. This is why it is considered Achor be Achor,
since Abba cannot administer to Bina from the He’arat Hochma, due
to the Achoraim de Hey Tata’a, even if Bina had returned her Panim
to the Hochma.
Conversely, Bina would not have received the Ohr Hochma from
Abba, even if Abba had returned his Panim to Bina, to give her Ohr
Hochma, “because He delighteth in mercy.” Thus we have thoroughly
explained the situation of the first degree, called Achor be Achor.
Above it is Achor be Panim. This means that the Zachar will turn
its Achoraim facing the Panim of the Nekeva.
You must know that two diminutions occurred in the Bina by the
ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim: 1 – The Masach that was
erected in the Eynaim, because of which Bina came down to the
Behinat restricted Malchut, in which there was a Zivug de Hakaa in
the Rosh and in which the Partzuf ended, meaning in Sefirat Bina de
NHY. The second diminution occurred in her by the force of the
Gevurot, meaning the blockage of Hassadim in the Kli Malchut from
the source of her emanation.
The matter of these Gevurot in Kli Malchut was explained above in
the Rav’s words regarding the Ohr Malchut in Kli de Yesod, present in
Partzuf AB de AK, which is Hitpashtut Bet de AK. The Orot have
changed and Ohr Hochma came in Kli de Keter, Ohr Bina in Kli de
Hochma etc. until Ohr Malchut in Kli de Yesod (Part 5, item 45 and
Ohr Pnimi there).
This is the Ohr Achoraim that remains of Sefirat Hod that no longer
has He’arat Hassadim of the VAK de ZA in it. Hence, it is discerned as
Behinot Hey Gevurot there in the Kli de Yesod.
It has also been explained there that the Shoresh of Malchut is the
Sefirat Hod, meaning the fifth Hesed of the Hey Hassadim, though she

--- PAGE 457 ---
has two diminutions in Yesod and in Malchut. Hence, Malchut is
discerned as having Kelim de Panim from the perspective of her
Hitkalelut in the ZA, that receive He’arat Hochma like the ZA, but
with a blockage of Hassadim.
Thus, the Panim and Achoraim found in the Kelim of Malchut have
been explained, and they are both Behinat Gevurot. In herself, she is
corrected with a Masach that rejects Hochma. This is discerned as her
Achoraim. Also, she has He’arat GAR from the perspective of her
Hitkalelut in ZA, which is the fifth Hesed, Hod, though she is blocked
to Hassadim. Bina received these two diminutions from Malchut, by
the ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim.
Now you can understand the necessity for these two situations, Achor
be Achor and Achor be Panim. First, the first diminution is erected,
being the hard Achoraim of the Malchut because of the Masach and
the Tzimtzum that lie on Bina because of the Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey
Eynaim. This Tikun is done by the Achoraim de Bina.
After this is corrected, there still remains the second diminution on
her, being the blockage of Hassadim in the Kli de Panim of the
Malchut that rests on the Bina due to the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim.
This is done by the state of Achor be Panim, as the Zachar, which is
Hochma, shines Ohr Hassadim in her from his Behinat Achoraim into
the Kelim de Panim of the Bina, which suffer from this shortage only,
as they do not lack He’arat GAR.
Now Bina is corrected from the perspective of the Kelim, both in her
Achor part, and in her Panim part. However, she still receives only
Ohr de Hassadim from the Behinat Achoraim of the Hochma, and she
is still unfit to receive the Ohr Panim, which is Ohr Hochma.
Above it, it is Panim be Achor.
The first two Tikkunim, Achor be Achor and Achor be Panim,
extended from the Achoraim de Bina. The Tikun of Achor be Achor is
the Achoraim de Bina, which reject Hochma, “because He delighteth
in mercy.” Hence, the matter of the Masach does not diminish her at

--- PAGE 458 ---
all, since she rejects Hochma anyhow. For this reason she is not
blemished by the Masach at all.
After the Achoraim are corrected, begins the Tikun of the Kelim de
Panim by itself. This is because their entire shortage was from the
blockage of Hassadim. Now, however, after the Tikun de Achor be
Achor, they receive abundant Hassadim from the Achoraim de
Hochma.
However, that third degree, which is Panim be Achor, meaning the
Panim of the Zachar in the Achoraim of the Nekeva, comes to him by
the Zivug de AB SAG that lowers the Hey Tata’a from Eynaim to Peh.
At that time HB return to the Rosh, and the Zachar, which is Hochma,
attains his Behinat Panim as in the beginning. However, Bina still
remains in Behinat Achoraim, since she still does not have the power
to receive with her Kelim de Panim.
She still does not have the strength to receive it through the
Panim.
In fact, she can receive the Ohr Pnimi of Hochma, as she is already
above the Masach, as in the previous Partzufim of AK. Bina holds to
her Achoraim due to the previous Tikkunim, Achor be Achor and
Achor be Panim, the first being the Achoraim de Ima that want Hesed
and reject Hochma, the second being the Behinat Gevurot in her Kelim
de Panim that are thirsty for the Ohr Hassadim from their Shoresh.
She does not wish to disclose her Kelim de Panim to receive Ohr
Hochma from the Zachar, only Ohr de Achoraim, namely Hassadim.
He says, “she still does not have the strength to receive it through the
Panim,” because of the great yearning for Ohr de Hassadim that she
has.
The Ohr becomes a little thicker there etc. she will be able to
receive it, since it became a little more Av.
It means that this Ohr Panim, received in the Kelim de Achoraim of
Bina, greatly improves her Achoraim, until the Achoraim themselves
ascend to complete Behinat GAR. Thus, the Kelim de Panim become

--- PAGE 459 ---
of secondary importance and receive the Ohr GAR from the Kelim of
the Achoraim. It follows that the Kelim de Achoraim are more
important than the Kelim de Panim, as they administer them.
The reason for it is that indeed, the Kelim de Achoraim receive only a
very small He’arah from the Ohr Panim of the Zachar since they are
Kelim that reject Hochma and crave only Ohr de Hassadim. However,
that diminished He’arah that they receive brings the Achoraim to be
more important than the Kelim de Panim.
This is so because when the Kelim de Panim received Hochma,
meaning the Ohr Malchut in Kli de Yesod in the previous Partzufim,
they were in great blockage of Ohr Hassadim, which is the Hey
Gevurot in the Yesod. However, these Kelim de Achoraim have an
abundance of Ohr de Hassadim, and some diminished He’arat
Hochma that they receive.
He says, “the Ohr becomes a little thicker,” meaning it is a small
He’arah because of the force of rejection found in the Kelim de
Achoraim. “The Ohr becomes a little thicker there, and when the Ohr
passes through the Achor and reaches the side of her Panim, she will
be able to receive it, since it became a little more Av.”
In other words, when the Kelim de Panim could receive He’arat
Hochma, they could not receive the Ohr Hassadim, but were in
Behinot Gevurot. Now, however, that they receive He’arat Hochma
through the Kelim de Achoraim, they have both Hochma and
Hassadim.
“A wise will better her in the back (Achor)” etc. more than if they
were the opposite, which is Achor in Panim.
This is because now the Hochma improves the Ohr Achoraim and
turns it into Behinat GAR and Ohr Panim. Before that, when they
were in Behinat Achor be Panim, though they received in the Behinat
Kelim de Panim, they only received Ohr de Achor from Hochma.
Now, however, although they receive in the Kelim de Achoraim, she
receives Ohr GAR and Panim.

--- PAGE 460 ---
24. Above all is the fourth degree, being the Zachar and Nekeva in
Panim be Panim one opposite the other. This is so because then she
receives the Ohr of the Panim of the Zachar, which is a wonderful
Ohr. Moreover, there is no need for it to first thicken in her Achor,
she can receive it as she is, Zach, through her Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
24. The fourth degree, being the Zachar and Nekeva in Panim be
Panim.
The first two degrees, Achor be Achor and Achor be Panim, are
extended through the Achoraim de Ima, and the third degree is
extended through the Zivug Elyon de AB SAG that lowers the Hey
Tata’a from the Eynaim. This Tikun is beneficial only for the Zachar
to acquire its Panim as in the beginning. However, the Nukva is still
cleaved by the force of her Achoraim, choosing Hassadim and
rejecting Hochma.
Hence, Bina needs raising MAN from the Tachtonim, which are ZON,
as only then is she forced to stop her force of Achoraim and return the
Panim to Hochma. She does it only for ZON since she cannot extend
them He’arat Hochma except by that. For this reason she returns
Panim be Panim with the Hochma, which is the fourth degree.
Know, that the matter of raising MAN that returns to HB Panim be
Panim is rooted back in Eser Sefirot de Ohr Yashar. This is because
Bina de Ohr Yashar is Behinat Ohr de Hassadim and not Hochma
(Part 1, Chap 1, Ohr Pnimi item 50).
Thus, she too is considered to be with her Achoraim to Hochma.
However, when she wishes to emanate the ZA, who is essentially
He’arat Hochma, she must return her Panim to Hochma Panim be
Panim in order to receive He’arat Hochma from him to the ZA de Ohr
Yashar.
It follows that as long as she does not emanate the ZA, she is in
Achoraim with the Hochma. After she emanates the ZA she is Panim
be Panim with the Hochma, to extend its He’arah for it. You find that

--- PAGE 461 ---
the original root of the state of HB Panim be Panim is the ZA de Ohr
Yashar.
Now you can thoroughly understand the above words of the Rav (Part
5, item 51), who says that the Ohr Hesed placed in Bina, which is Ohr
ZA, remains in her always in Behinat MAN. It means that when Bina
wants to extend the Gadlut of the Ohr Hesed in order to emanate it to
its place, she must then return her Panim to the Hochma. For this
reason this Ohr Hesed is considered Behinat MAN to the Bina,
meaning that which causes her Zivug Panim be Panim with the
Hochma.
Thus, the matter of raising MAN has been thoroughly explained,
meaning a stimulating element for Zivug HB. Without that element,
Hochma and Bina would not have mated Panim be Panim because of
the Achoraim de Bina that reject Hochma, “because He delighteth in
mercy.”
This element is the ZON, as they are the progeny of Bina and their
essence is only He’arat Hochma. This is so because the whole
difference between Bina de Ohr Yashar and the ZON de Ohr Yashar is
only in that He’arat Hochma that the Bina extends for the ZA.
After all, they are both Ohr of Hassadim, though Bina is Ohr de
Hassadim without any He’arat Hochma, and ZA is in He’arat
Hochma (Part 1, Chap 1, Ohr Pnimi item 50). For this reason a Zivug
de Gadlut cannot be depicted for AVI without ascent of MAN since as
long as the ZON do not rise to MAN to Bina, it is tied in a craving for
Hamshacha of Hassadim, being the essence of her structure back from
the Ohr Yashar. Remember these words in all the places that bear any
mention of raising MAN.
25. Know, that in ZON, all four mentioned Behinot were in the above
order, but in AVI there were only three Behinot in them, which are
the first, the third and the fourth, though the second Behina had
no need for them.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 462 ---
25. In AVI there were only three Behinot in them.
This is so because the second degree of Achor be Panim does not
apply to AVI. The reason is that the two degrees, Achor be Panim and
Panim be Achor, are erected in them at once, meaning at the lowering
of the Hey Tata’a from Eynaim to Peh. At that time Bina returns to her
previous state and the diminutions of the Hey Tata’a do not touch her
at all. However, in ZON, the Nukva needs two corrections for both her
diminutions, one for the Kelim de Achoraim and another for the Kelim
de Panim.
26. *Now we shall explain the matter of Achoraim de AVI that fell and
broke as well. First, we must explain the introduction of Panim be
Panim and Achor be Achor.
The thing is that the place of the Klipot and the exteriors are the
Achoraim of Nukva de ZA, and there they cling. However, there is
also some gripping to the Achor de ZA.
Before God created Adam on earth the Klipot had strength to suck
Shefa from the Kedusha, as it is written, “and there was not a man
to till the ground.” One of the works on the soil is mowing thorns
from the vineyard, for which, practical Mitzvot are needed.
However, when ZAT were emanated, the lower Adam ha Rishon
had not been created in the world. ZON emerged Achor be Achor
for fear of the sucking of the exteriors.
This is because had they stood Panim be Panim, the Klipot would
have had a place to grip in their holding place to suck, which are
the Achoraim. This is because they cannot suck from the Panim,
and for this reason they had to cleave Achor be Achor so that the
exteriors would not be able to suck from there.
Ohr Pnimi
26. The place of the Klipot and the exteriors are the Achoraim of
Nukva de ZA, and there they cling.
This is so because the Klipot cling only to a place of lack, meaning in
a place that does not shine, called Achoraim, meaning precisely to the

--- PAGE 463 ---
Achoraim de ZAT, which are ZON. However, they have no hold at all
in GAR.
There is also a division in ZON between the ZA and the Nukva. This is
because their hold is primarily in Nukva de ZA, as she is the ending
Sefira of the Partzuf, which stops the Ohr in the Partzuf from
expanding further by the force of the Tzimtzum and the Masach in her.
For this reason her Achoraim are complete darkness, as it is written,
“Her feet go down to death,” being the Klipot, called “death”. He
writes, “the place of the Klipot and the exteriors are the Achoraim of
Nukva de ZA, and there they cling.” It means that the Klipot and the
exteriors begin from the place of darkness downward, which is from
the Sium of the Nukva downward, because after her begins darkness,
as she is Behinat Sium on the Ohr in the Partzuf.
However, there is also some gripping to the Achor de ZA.
Meaning in the full amount that does not shine, called Achoraim,
because the rule is that Tzor is built only over the ruin of Jerusalem.
This is so because the entire sustenance and construction of the Sitra
Achra is on the ruin of the Kedusha. Thus, when Kedusha is corrected
until there is no form of ruin in it, the Sitra Achra will be cancelled
from the world, as it is written, “He will swallow up death for ever.”
Before God created Adam on earth the Klipot had strength to suck
Shefa etc.
This means that then ZON could not mate Panim be Panim because
there is no Zivug Panim be Panim without a raising of MAN by their
Tachton. It is explained there in AVI, and so it is regarding ZON, as
ZON too are corrected in Achor be Achor because of the Achoraim de
Ima, as we shall see below.
Thus, Nukva too does not stop her Achoraim before she has an
element that compels her to that. This element are the Neshamot of the
righteous that rise to her for MAN. In order to give them He’arat GAR,
she must stop her Achoraim and return her Panim to ZA, and then
mate with the ZA Panim be Panim.

--- PAGE 464 ---
Hence, before Adam ha Rishon was created, there was no one to raise
MAN to the Nukva de ZA. For this reason they lacked GAR, meaning
Ohr Panim, which is the primary sustenance of the Partzuf. This is
why there was power in the Klipot to draw Shefa from the Kedusha,
meaning from the Behinat lack of this Ohr GAR.
ZON emerged Achor be Achor for fear of the sucking of the
exteriors.
It means that they emerged in the Tikun of the Achoraim de Ima since
they rose above to AVI, ZA was incorporated in Abba, and Nukva de
ZA in Ima. By so doing they have acquired Behinat Achoraim de Ima,
which is as sufficient for them as He’arat GAR (Ohr Pnimi item 23).
Once they have obtained that, the exteriors can no longer suck from
ZON, it is considered for them as Behinat Ohr GAR. Since there is
Ohr GAR in the Partzuf, there is no place for the exteriors to suck
from, as there is grip only in ZAT without GAR.
Had they stood Panim be Panim, the Klipot would have had a
place to grip in their holding place.
This does not mean had they stood in Zivug Panim be Panim. On the
contrary, then the Klipot would have been expelled from ZON entirely.
Instead, it means that if they had not had that Tikun of Achor be
Achor, but the Nukva had wanted to receive the Ohr Panim of ZA,
their Achoraim would have been exposed. In other words, the lack of
GAR in them would have been exposed and sensed. In that state the
Klipot would have had a place to grip, meaning in the lack in them.
Now, however, when they are corrected in the Achoraim de Ima, when
they reject Ohr Hochma, meaning Ohr Panim, no lack is felt in them
where the exteriors can grip. This is because now the lack of Ohr
Hochma is not considered a flaw in them, as they do not want Hochma
anyhow (see Ohr Pnimi item 23).
He writes, “had they stood Panim be Panim, the Klipot would have
had a place to grip in their holding place to suck, which are the
Achoraim. This is because they cannot suck from the Panim.” This

--- PAGE 465 ---
means that if the Kelim de Panim of the Nukva had been open to
receive the Ohr Panim, the lack of Ohr Panim would have been
exposed in them, and this lack is Achoraim, from which the Klipot
grip and suck.
Remember onward, that Achoraim means a place of lack of Ohr
Hochma. In this manner there is hold and sucking for the exteriors,
whose entire sustenance is from the place of lack in the Kedusha.
Conversely, Achoraim de Ima is Behinat GAR, although there too
there is a necessary lack of Hochma, hence the name Achoraim.
However, with respect to Bina, this is not at all considered a lack since
she is so from her Shoresh in Bina de Ohr Yashar, choosing Hassadim
and rejecting Ohr Hochma.
Because Bina is essentially a Sefira from the GAR, hence her Ohr de
Hassadim is also considered GAR. After ZON rise and mingle in AVI
too, receiving this Tikun of Achoraim de Ima from them, they too
obtain He’arat GAR from these Behinat Achoraim de Ima, because of
which, this lack of Ohr Panim is not considered a shortcoming, even
in ZON.
27. When Adam ha Rishon was created and performed practical
Mitzvot he returned them Panim be Panim. In that state there was
no longer fear of the Klipot, as he had already dug, hoed, removed
the stones, and cut the thorns from the vineyard.
When they are Achor be Achor, ZON have only one wall for both
of them. One wall is enough for both of them and they use one
wall, half a wall for ZA and half a wall for Nukva. When Adam
returned them Panim be Panim through Mitzvot and good deeds,
one Achor was finished and completed, one complete Achor for
one, and one complete Achor for the other, and they can return
Panim be Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
27. Practical Mitzvot he returned them Panim be Panim.

--- PAGE 466 ---
This means that through good deeds that he deed, he cleaved further to
Kedusha and could scrutinize scrutinies in the Nitzotzin and Kelim that
fell to BYA, purifying them from the Sigim in them, meaning from the
mixture of Behina Dalet in them (Ohr Pnimi item 2).
In that state he raised them for MAN to the Nukva. These Nitzotzin and
Kelim that he raised came from the seven Melachim de Nekudim that
had already had Ohr Hochma before they broke. Also, they are parts
of Nukva, and hence Nukva de ZA feels their absence from the Ohr
Hochma, and hence stops her Achoraim, brings her Panim back to ZA,
and mates Panim be Panim.
In that state there was no longer fear of the Klipot, as he had
already dug, hoed, removed the stones, and cut the thorns from
the vineyard.
It means that after he sorted the Nitzotzin and the Kelim from all the
Sigim in them, called cultivating the vineyard, meaning dug, hoed, etc.
they are worthy of rising to MAN to Nukva, causing a Zivug Panim be
Panim there with ZA. At that time these Kelim are corrected in Behinat
GAR and there is no more fear that they will break, as had happened to
these Kelim in the first time in Olam Nekudim. This is so because the
thorns have already ended in the vineyard, which are the Sigim in
them, and from here on they remain forever in Kedusha.
One wall for both of them. One wall for both of them is enough
and they use one wall.
A “Wall” means Achoraim. This refers to Achoraim de Ima, corrected
in her in Behinat Achor be Achor, which satisfies both of them as
He’arat GAR. It complements the lack of Hochma in them, and for
this reason they are defended from the exteriors.
He writes, “One wall for both of them is enough.” It means that it is
enough for them to cover and conceal the lack of Hochma in their
Achoraim and the Klipot cannot suck from there.
Half a wall for ZA and half a wall for Nukva.

--- PAGE 467 ---
It means that both are contained in these Achoraim in a way that the
Klipot can suck from neither the ZA, nor the Nukva.
One complete Achor for one, and one complete Achor for the
other, and they can return Panim be Panim.
This is so because by the Hassadim and the Gevurot that they obtain
from the Zivug Elyon of AVI, by the Hassadim the Achoraim de ZA
are completed in Behinat GAR. Also, the Achoraim de Nukva are
completed in and of themselves in He’arat GAR through the Gevurot,
as written below, and then they are fitting to return Panim be Panim.
28. *The reason that now two complete Achoraim were made for them
was in this manner: Through Mitzvot and good deeds of the lower
Adam, he induced a Zivug Elyon in AVI, and they returned to give
them, to ZON, Behinat another Mochin. These are the Behinat
Hassadim and Gevurot of Daat de ZA, and this is the essential drop
that AVI give in their Zivug.
The reason is that the Orot of two Mochin de ZA, called HB, do not
appear in ZA. This is because they are clothed in the form of
Netzah Hod de Ima, and only a lessened He’arah exits by the force
of the Hakaa of disclosed Orot Hassadim. These strike them and
educe some He’arah from them outwardly.
It is not so in Hassadim and Gevurot that clothe inside Yesod de
Ima that end at Chazeh de ZA because from there they appear in
complete disclosure, exit into ZA, and shine in it. For this reason,
the most important are the Hassadim and the Gevurot.
Ohr Pnimi
28. Induced a Zivug Elyon in AVI.
This is because when Adam raises MAN to ZON, ZON too raise MAN
to AVI; then AVI above them, and further up above the Elyon to the
end of all the degrees. At that time a new Mochin come from Ein Sof
through the degrees until they reach AVI, and from them to ZON, as
there is no Hidush Ohr in the Olamot except from Ein Sof alone, and
remember that always.

--- PAGE 468 ---
Another Mochin, which are the Behinat Hassadim and Gevurot of
Daat de ZA.
It is written in the Zohar (Mishpatim p. 172), that “the Rosh of the
Melech is corrected in Hesed and Gevura.” However, Hesed rose to
Hochma, Gevura to Bina, and the Upper third of Tifferet from the
Chazeh upwards became its Daat. This is done by the Hassadim and
the Gevurot that it receives from Zivug de AVI.
This is the essential drop that AVI give in their Zivug.
You already know that the whole Zivug de AVI Panim be Panim is
because of the ZON that rose to them for MAN (Ohr Pnimi item 24).
Thus, first ZON were Achor be Achor, meaning without He’arat
Hochma. Instead, they were corrected in Achoraim de Ima, and then
they do not need Hochma at all.
This is the meaning of, “their hinder parts were inward.” This is
because the Behinat NHY de ZON, which are their Achoraim, are not
disclosed outwardly since the Achoraim de Ima extend from the Bina
de Ohr Yashar before she emanated ZON outwardly.
It is so because when she emanated the ZON she had already returned
Panim be Panim to extend He’arat Hochma for it (Ohr Pnimi item 24,
par. “Know”). Hence, since ZON were also corrected in those
Achoraim, because of that you find that NHY de ZON too, are still
incorporated in their HGT, in their Pnimiut, and only the HGT is
disclosed outwardly.
After Adam ha Rishon raised MAN to ZON, these MAN caused ZON to
not suffice for Achor be Achor, but need to extend He’arat Hochma.
For this reason they too rise for MAN to the Bina. They caused Bina to
stop her Achoraim as well, and mate with the Hochma Panim be
Panim.
In that state the drop departed this Zivug de AVI for the ZON. It refers
to that He’arat Hochma that is suitable for the NHY de ZON, rooted in
the Ohr Yashar, and in that the lack of the NHY of ZON is satisfied.

--- PAGE 469 ---
This drop de AVI clothes Yesod de Ima. This Yesod clothes in Tifferet
de ZA up to the Chazeh, and this is the disclosed HG that exit from
Yesod de Ima from the Chazeh downward, meaning the new NHY,
contained in that drop de Zivug AVI.
It has been said, that there is He’arat Hochma in them, that they can
now appear outwardly, and there is no fear of the Klipot, as now they
are complete without any dearth. For this reason they are called
exposed Hassadim and Gevurot.
However, prior to that, when the ZON were corrected in Achor be
Achor, these HB were covered and concealed in the Masach de
Achoraim de Ima in the form of, “their hinder parts were inward.”
HB, do not appear in ZA. This is because they are clothed in the
form of Netzah Hod de Ima.
The Mochin de ZA are clothed in NHY de Ima and NHY de Ima are
clothed in the HGT of ZA. Hesed ascends to Hochma, Gevura ascends
to Bina, and from the Chazeh upwards rises to Daat.
Hochma and Bina remained in Rosh de ZA and have no Hitpashtut
into the Guf. However, Daat de ZA in Yesod de Ima has Hitpashtut
from the Chazeh downward, which are the new NHY that now appear
in ZON.
He writes, “HB, their Orot do not appear” etc. It is not so in Hassadim
and Gevurot that clothe inside Yesod de Ima that end at Chazeh de ZA
from which they appear in complete disclosure and come out. In other
words, they are the Behinat NHY that appear outwardly because they
received the He’arat Hochma, and their Achoraim is completed
entirely.
29. You find that when Hassadim and Gevurot expand below in the
Guf de ZA, the Hassadim are given to ZA and in that complete and
finish the construction of its Achoraim entirely. Also, the Gevurot
are given to the Nukva and thus complete her Achoraim.
Thus, he has complete Achoraim and she has complete Achoraim.
In that state they can return Panim be Panim since their Achoraim

--- PAGE 470 ---
are complete and now the exteriors are unable to seize there. It
was not so in the beginning, when one had half the Achoraim and
the other had half, and they could have a hold in them.
For this reason they can now return Panim be Panim, as there is
no fear of the exteriors, as we say in the explanation of the
intention in the blessing of the patriarchs of the stance during the
weekdays, and examine that closely.
You find that the benefit from the entrance of the Hassadim and
the Gevurot in ZA was for two reasons, which are one: They
increase and complement the Achoraim de ZON, and in addition,
by that they return Panim be Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
29. The Hassadim are given to ZA etc. Also, the Gevurot are given to
the Nukva.
It has already been explained that the drop of Zivug that extends to ZA
is Behinat new disclosed NHY, and it is exposed Hassadim; it is
Hassadim and Gevurot that come out of Yesod de Ima that stops in the
place of Chazeh de ZA. This is because their own Behina is Hassadim,
and the part of Malchut in them is Gevurot.
He writes, “the Hassadim are given to ZA and in that complete and
finish the construction of its Achoraim entirely.” This is because now
that it acquired NHY in He’arat Hochma in Behinat NHY de Ohr
Yashar, the entire Gadlut of its Achoraim is completed and there is no
lack in them anymore.
For this reason they can now appear outwardly without any fear of the
exteriors. “The Gevurot are given to the Nukva and thus complete her
Achoraim.” This is because the Gevurot, which are Behinat NHY in
He’arat Hochma, contained in the drop of Zivug AVI from the
perspective of the Gevurot in them, are dispensed to the Nukva.
Now the NHY de Nukva too are completed and finished and appear
outwardly without any fear of the Klipot. Thus, they are now
separated from one another as each has his own Achoraim.

--- PAGE 471 ---
In that state they can return Panim be Panim since their Achoraim
are complete and the exteriors are unable to seize there. It was not
so in the beginning, when one had half the Achoraim and the other
had half, and they could have a hold in them.
It is written above that when they were Achor be Achor it means that
they were protected in the Achoraim de Ima that choose the Ohr
Hassadim more, and reject Hochma. It is true that that was enough to
keep them from the exteriors so that they cannot seize the place of
want, meaning the lack of He’arat Hochma since when they are
corrected in these Achoraim, they do not want Hochma and do not
need it.
Hence, no want is apparent in them where the exteriors could grip.
However, they are still regarded as having no NHY because the place
of the lack of Hochma manifests primarily in their NHY [written aside
in the author’s manuscript: What is missing in the NHY de Kelim is
missing in GAR de Orot due to the opposite value between the Kelim
and the Orot, and thus it should be said].
It is so because with respect to the Ohr Yashar, they are the essence of
ZON de Ohr Yashar, whose essence is not more than the He’arat
Hochma in them. This is because the Bina de Ohr Yashar is Ohr de
Hassadim without any Hochma, as she wants only Hassadim,
“because He delighteth in mercy.” Thus, the GAR in her are
considered HGT, as it is known that KHB in Behinat Hassadim are
discerned as HGT.
When she emanated the ZON, she saw that Hassadim cannot exist
without He’arat Hochma, and for this reason she extended He’arat
Hochma into Hassadim once more. This Hamshacha that has already
departed from Behinat Bina de Ohr Yashar acquired her own name,
which are ZON, or NHYM de Ohr Yashar (see Part 4, Chap 6, Ohr
Pnimi item 80).
Thus you see that the only difference between the Bina and the NHY
de Ohr Yashar is only in the He’arat Hochma that she extended. The
Behinat Hassadim without the He’arat Hochma is originally a part of

--- PAGE 472 ---
Bina herself, and Behinat He’arat Hochma in Hassadim are the part of
the NHYM, or ZON (see above Part 1, Chap 1, Ohr Pnimi item 50).
Now we have thoroughly clarified that the essence of the degree of
NHY is only the Behinat He’arat Hochma in them. For this reason as
long as there is no He’arat Hochma in them, they carry that lack.
Also, this is why the Klipot and the exteriors seize that lack. Because
of that too the NHY are called Achoraim, since Achoraim means a
place of lack. This is what the Rav wrote above (item 26), that the
place of the Klipot and the exteriors is the Achoraim of the Nukva de
ZA, and the Achor de ZA.
Because of the fear that the Klipot would grip these Achoraim, the
Achoraim were erected Achor be Achor, meaning in the Achoraim de
Ima, called “wall”. Through this wall, the NHYM take caution that the
lack of Hochma will not appear in them, and this is the meaning of,
“their hinder parts were inward.”
The NHY are concealed in the Pnimiut, being inside the wall of Ima
that defends them, and their Panim are disclosed outwardly, meaning
the HGT, which they do not need for He’arat Hochma in their origin
in Ohr Yashar. We have said that they extend from the Behinat Bina
before she extended the Ohr Hochma. For this reason they can be
disclosed outwardly, as no want appears in them and no place to grip
for the outer ones.
He writes, “In that state they can return Panim be Panim since their
Achoraim are complete and the exteriors are unable to seize there. It is
unlike it was in the beginning, when one had half the Achoraim and
the other had half, and they could have a hold in them.”
In the beginning, when they were erected in one wall, meaning in
Achoraim de Ima, they were both adhesive in this wall, which is the
wall of HGT, and there was no difference between the ZA and the
Nukva. This is because now both are Behinat Hassadim without
Gevurot because the whole HGT is now Hassadim because of the
Achoraim de Ima, and this is the meaning of “because He delighteth in
mercy.”

--- PAGE 473 ---
However, now that they have already obtained the drop of Zivug de
AVI, which is the NHY in He’arat Hochma, their Achoraim now grew
and were completed. ZA took the NHY from the side of Hassadim, and
its Achoraim were completed and finished until there was no lack in it,
as there is already He’arat Hochma in it. For this reason his
Achoraim, meaning the NHY, can appear outwardly without any fear.
Similarly, the Nukva took these NHY from the side of the Gevurot and
her Achor was completed. Now she could separate from the Achor of
ZA, as she had a complete Achor of her own, namely the Gevurot de
NHY. For this reason they now mate Panim be Panim and dispense
He’arat Hochma to their MAN, which are the Neshamot of the
righteous.
For two reasons, which are one. They increase and complement
the Achor de ZA, and in addition, by that they return Panim be
Panim.
This is because the complete Achoraim that they have acquired,
meaning the new disclosed NHY, raise the HGT to Behinat HBD and
Mochin, and they mate Panim be Panim. The Mochin and the Zivug
extend from the disclosed Zivug, and for this reason they are regarded
as one Behina.
30. It turns out that as mentioned in the introductions, on the one
hand, this He’arah that now comes from these Hassadim and
Gevurot that now came anew will be more, and better, and greater
than the first He’arah that ZON had already had. This is because
he emanated the first only in Behinat Achor be Achor, and this
new He’arah returned them Panim be Panim. Hence, this new
He’arah will be called Behinat Panim be Panim.
However, on the other hand, this new He’arah will be worse than
the first He’arah. This is so because the first He’arah made and
emanated all their Partzufim, and this new He’arah performed
only the increase of half their Achoraim.
Their return Panim be Panim came anyway, hence the Behina of
this new He’arah shall be called Achor be Achor, since its benefit

--- PAGE 474 ---
was only to increase half of the Achor alone.
Ohr Pnimi
30. He emanated the first only in Behinat Achor be Achor etc. made
and emanated all their Partzufim etc.
The first He’arah is the concealed HGT and NHY, and the second
He’arah is the disclosed NHY. He says that we can call the first
He’arah both by the name Panim, and by the name Achoraim.
The second one can also be called Panim and Achoraim. This is so
because from the perspective of the first He’arah being the actual
emanation of the entire Partzuf, it can be called Panim, all the more so
since the HGT are the Kelim de Panim that become HBD in Gadlut.
It can also be named Achoraim because of the situation of Achor be
Achor in them. Similarly, the new He’arah can be called Panim
although she is only Behinat NHY. Because these NHY are disclosed,
they extended the Panim be Panim of the ZON, and can be called
Achoraim since they are Behinat completion and increment of the
Achoraim, meaning the NHY.
31. Regarding this introduction, it will be clarified to you, and you
shall understand and learn what will be explained regarding the
fall of the Achoraim de Kelim de AVI from here on.
Know, that the thing is that these Behinot of Hassadim and
Gevurot that increase the Achoraim de ZON and return them
Panim be Panim, is a matter of the Behinot of the Achoraim of AVI
that fell. Hence, do not be surprised if at one time we call this
Behina Panim, and once it is called Achoraim.
This and those Hassadim and Gevurot with the Behinot they had
enhanced in the Achoraim, all fell down. These are the Behinot
Hassadim and Gevurot that take AVI from AA so that they return
Panim be Panim. This is so because in AVI too, their stance was
Achor be Achor too, as will be explained.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 475 ---
31. These Behinot of Hassadim and Gevurot that increase the
Achoraim de ZON and return them Panim be Panim, is a matter of
the Behinot of the Achoraim of AVI that fell.
He explains below that the state of AVI de Nekudim was first Achor be
Achor too, like the ZON. For this reason they too were in Behinat,
“their hinder parts were inward.” It means that their NHY were
concealed and covered in the Achoraim de Ima, which is Behinat
original HGT prior to the exit of the NHY from them, meaning the
Bina de Ohr Yashar before she emanated the NHY de Ohr Yashar.
However, afterwards, the Hey Tata’a descended from the Eynaim de
Keter and HB in it returned to the Rosh, and then the Yesod de AK
gave them its drop, which is the Vav and Nekuda that became MAN in
them. At that time NHY de Keter clothed in them in the form of
He’arat disclosed NHY, and AVI mated Panim be Panim on their
MAN.
You find that the Zivug de Gadlut Panim be Panim de AVI on the
MAN de Yesod de AK was also through attaining the new disclosed
NHY that they have acquired from the Keter because that is where
their Zivug Panim be Panim extends from. Afterwards, the Behinat
Guf of that Zivug is dispensed to ZAT and they break. Consequently,
the Behinat Gadlut de AVI descends to Behinat HGT and VAK.
This Gadlut is not more and not less than the Behinat new disclosed
NHY that had He’arat Hochma and GAR, that have now fallen into
VAK. It means that the He’arat GAR departed from them and they
have become Behinat incomplete Achoraim.
32. It is known that the drop that raises and shapes the fetus is the
Behinat Hassadim and Gevurot, as we have mentioned above. This
is the meaning of the Otiot that make up the fetus.
Also, the Otiot are always the Behinot Kelim. These become Kelim
to AVI in Behinat Achoraim. They are also the ones that descended
and fell below with the rest of the Hassadim that descend to depict
the Kelim of the fetus. These are the general seven Melachim that
died, which are incorporated in ZON.

--- PAGE 476 ---
33. All these are the Behinat twenty-two Otiot of the Torah. The seven
Otiot are Kelim to the ZON, which are seven Melachim, and fifteen
Otiot are Kelim to AVI because the Achoraim of AVI are greater
than any ZON. The sign of the number of Otiot Kelim de AVI is
fifteen, like the number YH.
Also, it is known that AVI are the first two Otiot YH of the
HaVaYaH. The Otiot of ZON are SATNZ GT צגזןטעש (Shin, Ayin,
Tet, Nun, Zayin, and Gimel, Tzadik), and the other fifteen Otiot of
the alphabet are in AVI. Six Otiot of them are BDK HYH הײהךדב
(Bet, Dalet, Kof, and Het, Yod, Hey), mentioned in the manuscript
of the book of Zohar, being the Achoraim de AVI, and the rest of
the Otiot are Panim to AVI.
Ohr Pnimi
33. The Otiot of ZON are SATNZ GT צגזןטעש
It implies to Behina Dalet that mixed in their Kelim. This mixture is
called SATNZ, which are the Sigim (Ohr Pnimi item 2), and the GT
implies the Nitzotzin that descended to revive the Kelim.
BDK HYH etc. being the Achoraim de AVI.
This implies the Behinat exposed NHY, which are the Achor de AVI.
BDK means correction, from words Badak (lit. Checked) the house.
HYH means Ohr Hochma, since it is known that Ohr Hochma is
called Haya. The entire merit of these NHY is the He’arat Hochma in
them, hence they are implied in the name BDK HYH, meaning Tikun
Hochma in Hassadim.
There is yet another reason why they are implied in the Otiot BDK
HYH. It is that these Achoraim de AVI fell in the place of ZON.
Afterwards, at the time of the Tikun, ZA sorts scrutinies from these
Achoraim and raises them for MAN to AVI.
AVI mate Panim be Panim through these MAN, and dispense Mochin
to ZA. Thus, all the Mochin de ZA are through the MAN that rise from
these Achoraim. For this reason they are called BDK HYH, named
after the Tikun of the Mochin de GAR of the ZA that comes through

--- PAGE 477 ---
them. As we have said above, BDK means Tikun, and HYH is Ohr
Hochma and Mochin.
34. Now you will thoroughly understand why there are Tagin over
these thirteen Otiot, more than the other nine, why on seven of
them that are SATNZ GT there are three Tagin on each and every
Ot of them, and on the other six, which are BDK HYH there are no
Tagin on them, but only one Tag (singular for Tagin) on each of
their Otiot.
The thing is that the SATNZ GT are Behinat seven Melachim de
ZON, from whose Sigim the Klipot called STN AZ were made,
hence the name SATNZ. It is a connection of STN, as mentioned in
the Zohar, indicating that through the fierce and strong Din came
out the SaTaN, which is the Klipot.
It is also called GT, to indicate what they said in the book of
Zohar, Parashat Pekudei, that these Melachim are the 320
Nitzotzin that were thrown, like that craftsman that hammered the
iron and generated Nitzotzin. It is also as our sages said, “A spark
that comes from under the hammer is SATNZ GT.”
35. It has already been explained above that these seven Melachim
took their He’arot because of the Histaklut Ohr Eynaim of AK in
the Orot Akudim in their Behinat Hitpashtut below in the place of
the Guf of AK. This is why they broke, since they lacked the
He’arat GAR in it, which are AHP in their place above, hence they
broke Panim and Achoraim.
Also, for this reason they were tagged with three Tagin on each of
their Otiot, indicating the shortage and absence of the three above-
mentioned kinds of Orot, which are the Otiot. The Ohr remained
above the Gufim, which are the Otiot, and not inside them, as will
be explained below in the meaning of Tagin.
Ohr Pnimi
35. These seven Melachim took their He’arot etc. in their Behinat
Hitpashtut below in the place of the Guf.

--- PAGE 478 ---
There are four divisions in the Eynaim: three Roshim, and Guf. This is
because the Eser Sefirot de Rosh are divided into three. The first Rosh
is Galgalta ve Eynaim, the second Rosh is Awzen, and the third Rosh
is Hotem Peh. After that the Guf, which is ZON.
The first Rosh is YESHSUT from the Tabur de AK upward. It does not
join Partzuf de Nekudim at all. The second Rosh is Keter de Nekudim,
and the third Rosh is AVI de Nekudim.
The Guf is the ZAT of the Nekudim, and it is known that every Partzuf
is emanated by the Rosh in the Partzuf Elyon. Also, Partzuf de
Nekudim that emerged from the Eynaim was emanated in its Elyon,
which is the Rosh de Partzuf SAG de AK.
This Zivug that was in Rosh de SAG for the purpose of the Nekudim,
where four divisions emerged, is called Se’arot Dikna de SAG. The
first three Tikkunim of Dikna that depend on the Rosh de SAG itself,
are the Behinat Rosh ha Aleph, which does not join the Partzuf. They
are called Orot AHP in their exit place, meaning the Shoresh of
Partzuf AHP, which are the Nekudim.
The Shibolet ha Zakan is the Behinat Rosh ha Bet, and Rosh ha Gimel
is called the Orot AHP that are not in their exit place that receive from
Rosh ha Aleph. The KHB de Nekudim receive from these AHP in
Shibolet ha Zakan. The Keter receives from the Behinat Awzen in
Shibolet ha Zakan, HB receive from the Behinat Hotem Peh in
Shibolet ha Zakan, meaning each Behina from its corresponding
Behina in the Rosh SAG.
The Keter, which is Rosh ha Bet, receives from Awzen in the Shibolet,
which is the Behinat Rosh ha Bet of Dikna. HB de Nekudim, which are
Rosh ha Gimel, receive from HP in the Shibolet, which are Rosh ha
Gimel de Dikna, and the ZAT de Nekudim, being Behinat Guf of the
Nekudim, receive from the Dikna below the Shibolet. These are also
the Behinot Guf of the Dikna [and we have already elaborated on that
Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 23].
He says, “these seven Melachim took their He’arot because of the
Histaklut Ohr Eynaim of AK in the Orot Akudim in their Behinat

--- PAGE 479 ---
Hitpashtut below in the place of the Guf of AK.” It means that the
seven Melachim, which are the Behinat Guf of the Partzuf Nekudim,
receive from the Behinat Guf of the Dikna from below the Shibolet,
which is in turn, their corresponding Behina in Rosh ha SAG.
They are called Akudim de AK since they are above Tabur de AK, and
the Nekudim being only below Tabur. He says, “This is why they
broke, since they lacked the He’arat GAR in it, which are AHP in their
place above.” It means that they do not have a Shoresh in the Rosh,
which are GAR, from the beginning of their creation, and their whole
He’arah is only from the Behinat Gadlut de AVI de Nekudim. When
they could no longer tolerate the Ohr of the Gadlut, they broke Panim
and Achor.
36. Yet, Otiot BDK HYH, which are Kelim de Achoraim de AVI, of
which it has been explained that AVI took two Orot Hotem and
Peh, and only the Ohr Awzen is lacking in them. For this reason
only the Behinot Achoraim descended form them.
To indicate that one Ohr of the Awzen that is missing from them,
we tag one Tag only on each Ot of them, for it alone departed. It
stands hanging above the Ot, which is the Kli.
Ohr Pnimi
36. He writes, “AVI, of which it has been explained that they took two
Orot Hotem and Peh, and only the Ohr Awzen is lacking in them. For
this reason only the Behinot Achoraim descended form them.”
Because they are essentially Behinat Rosh and also had some He’arah
from the Ohr Awzen (Part 6 item 24), hence there is Behinat GAR in
them from the beginning of their creation, though in Behinat Achor be
Achor.
For this reason this whole Behina that they have from their very
creation is called Panim. They sustained and were not cancelled but
only the Behinat Zivug de Gadlut and Panim be Panim that they have
attained afterwards as additions, called Achoraim, and this alone
descended and was cancelled from them.

--- PAGE 480 ---
37. We have already explained that what descended from AVI is
called by two names, which are Achoraim or Panim. This is
because as it lacks the Ohr Awzen, being the more Elyon Ohr of all
three Orot, the want that extends to them through its departure is
very great, and this is the Behina that makes them return Panim
be Panim.
38. These Mochin, which are the above-mentioned Hassadim, extend
to AVI with the Kelim of NHY de AVI like the Mochin de ZA that
extend clothed inside NHY de AVI. These NHY de AVI too
descended below with the Achoraim de AVI.
In the sense that they come from AA, you find that this matter too
shall be called a need for an Upper Nekuda, called Keter. We have
already explained that this too is called Behinat want in Keter, and
it caused it, as it does not take the Ohr Awzen, only at its tail, not
at its Rosh.
However, with regard to these NHY have already expanded as
Kelim de Mochin inside AVI, this lack is named after AVI, and not
after the Keter.
Ohr Pnimi
38. He writes that the Kelim NHY de Keter that clothe in AVI in Behinat
Levushim for Mochin were also cancelled. However, they are not
considered Keter since they have already clothed in AVI.
This is because this Rosh ha Bet, which is Keter de Nekudim, did not
take anything from the Behinat Zivug de Gadlut of the Nekudim, as it
is Behinat Bina de Rosh and GAR from its very creation. Only its
Behinat NHY that clothe in AVI that became Levushim for Mochin for
them, which came at the time of Gadlut de Nekudim, only they were
cancelled.
39. *We shall return to the intention and say that AVI were first
Panim be Panim since the Mochin was made for them from the
Keter. Hence, their MAN, which causes their erection and
sustenance of the Behina de Panim be Panim, was the reality of

--- PAGE 481 ---
these seven Melachim that were in the Me’i Bina, and these were
its MAN.
This is how it always is. The sons are MAN de Ima while these
seven Melachim that were inside the Bina raised MAN and caused
a Zivug to AVI. The Mochin were extended to them, AVI were
returned Panim be Panim, and they mated together in order to
educe these seven Melachim.
When these Melachim came out, had they not died but existed,
they would have situated AVI Panim be Panim although they came
out below. In addition, they would have been beneficial for their
MAN although because they broke and died.
For this reason the Achoraim of AVI too, which locate them Panim
be Panim, went below and then returned Achor be Achor, as there
is no one to raise MAN for them anymore, and sustain their return
Panim be Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
39. AVI were first Panim be Panim since the Mochin was made for
them from the Keter.
We have written above (Ohr Pnimi item 31) that the Zivug de Gadlut
de AVI was by obtaining the disclosed NHY from Keter de Nekudim.
Their MAN, which causes their erection and sustenance of the
Behina de Panim be Panim, was the reality of these seven
Melachim.
It has already been explained above that AVI do not return Panim be
Panim unless through raising MAN de ZON (Ohr Pnimi item 24)
because Bina is in the form of “because He delighteth in mercy” at her
Shoresh, and rejects Hochma. However, when ZON rise to her for
MAN, her Shoresh de Ohr Yashar awakens in her since ZON de Ohr
Yashar are her sons, which she emanated in He’arat Hochma.
Hence, after ZON rise to her for MAN and Bina awakens to dispense
them He’arat Hochma, she then arrests her Achoraim and returns her
Panim to Hochma. She mates with him Panim be Panim and renews

--- PAGE 482 ---
He’arat Hochma to ZON, and once ZON obtain He’arat Hochma, they
come to their place below. From there on Bina is found in a Zivug
Panim be Panim with Hochma in order to sustain He’arat Hochma in
ZON.
Here [Written aside in the manuscript of the author: “Needs scrutiny.
After all ZON were previously emanated from Hotem Peh de Dikna.
They only received the Gadlut from the Vav and Nekuda, as it is
written in Part 6, Histaklut Pnimit item 19, that lowering the Hey
Tata’a to the Peh, which is the Vav, makes the Shuruk] the ZON were
not yet emanated to be able to raise MAN to AVI.
This is why this raising of MAN was made by the inner NHY de AK,
and the Yesod de AK illuminated the Shuruk for AVI, the Vav ו and
Nekuda. It is written in the Rav’s words (Part 6 item 31) that the ו is
Behinat ZA, and the Nekuda is the Behinat Nukva, and they became
MAN in Ima. At that time Ima was awakened to bestow He’arat
Hochma in them, stopped her Achoraim, and returned Panim be
Panim with Abba.
AVI raise MAN higher up, meaning to Keter, and Keter too above it
etc. up to Ein Sof. Then a new Ohr comes down from Ein Sof and
cascades through the degrees until the drop of Zivug de AVI that
descends on the ו and Nekuda inside them, which are ZON.
They acquire He’arat Hochma, and then expand to their place below,
meaning to the bottom seven de Nekudim. In addition, in order to keep
the He’arat Hochma in the ZON, Ima must extend the Panim be
Panim with Abba.
Now you can thoroughly understand the Rav’s words that ZON not
only cause the returning of AVI Panim be Panim when they are up in
Ima in the form of MAN, but even after they expand downward to
their place, they are still considered the causes of the sustenance of the
Zivug AVI Panim be Panim. Because of them Ima must be Panim be
Panim with Abba, in order to keep their He’arah in ZON.
He writes, “their MAN, which causes their erection and sustenance of
the Behina de Panim be Panim, was the reality of these seven

--- PAGE 483 ---
Melachim that were in the Me’i Bina, and these were its MAN.” It
means that in the beginning, the seven Melachim were in Behinat
MAN in the Me’i of Bina since they are the ו and Nekuda that Yesod de
AK administered them, which caused the return of Panim be Panim
with Abba when they came to Me’i Ima.
Afterwards, when the seven Melachim expanded and descended to
their place, they still induce AVI sustenance and existence of the
Behina de Panim be Panim. This is because Bina must extend her
Zivug Panim be Panim with Abba because of them, in order to
administer and keep the He’arat Hochma in them.
Because they broke and died. For this reason the Achoraim of AVI
too, which locate them Panim be Panim, went below.
The whole matter of the Hamshacha of the Zivug Panim be Panim de
AVI is only in order to keep He’arat Gadlut in the sons, which are
ZON. Hence, when the sons died, Bina no longer needs to extend the
Panim be Panim with Abba. For this reason they return Achor be
Achor and all the Behinat Orot de Gadlut that were in them descend
from their degree and fall to Behinat Guf and ZAT, meaning they were
rejected from the Rosh de AVI.
The reason that they descend from the Rosh de AVI is that the Bina
returned to her original degree that appreciates Hassadim more than
the Ohr Hochma. You find, that after the sons died and she no longer
has a need to extend He’arat Hochma for them, she immediately
returns Achor be Achor, meaning to her first state, to extend Hassadim
and reject Hochma.
By that she rejected and dropped the Mochin de Hochma outside the
Rosh into Behinat ZAT, as it is written, “my princes all of them kings”
(Isaiah 10;8). This is because these Achoraim that descended from
their degree and became ministers, were Melachim before, meaning
when they were up in Rosh de AVI in Behinat Mochin de Gadlut. Now
that they have descended into Behinat ZAT, they have become
ministers, meaning subordinate and enslaved to the Melachim.

--- PAGE 484 ---
40. It is simple: the Achoraim de AVI did not stop descending until the
end of the breaking of the seven Kelim. Each Behinat breaking of
one Melech caused a descent of some of the Achoraim de AVI, and
this is the explanation of the matter.
When we appreciate the existence of these seven Melachim in the
four Partzufim of HB, Israel Saba ve Tvuna, we find that until a
third of Sefirat Tifferet, being the fourth Melech, the Achoraim de
Upper AVI completed their descent. When all seven Melachim
broke, the Achoraim de Israel Saba ve Tvuna came down as well.
Ohr Pnimi
40. These seven Melachim in the four Partzufim of HB, Israel Saba ve
Tvuna etc.
We must understand the matter of the assessment of the seven
Melachim in the four Partzufim AVI and YESHSUT. This is the key to
understand the reign and the death of the seven Melachim de Nekudim,
as well as all the Behinat ZON in ABYA that these seven Melachim are
their Shoresh. We shall explain them here briefly in general. We shall
explain them in detail below, in the interpretation of the Rav’s words
below.
Know, that five Partzufim emerged here in Olam ha Nekudim, four
Partzufim that are Hochma, Bina, Israel Saba and Tvuna. These
emerged in Rosh and Guf. The fifth Partzuf, which is Partzuf Daat,
came out in Rosh without a Guf.
You should also know that the order of the breaking of the vessels was
in the order of the Hizdakchut of the Masach according to the degree,
like the order of the Histalkut of the Orot from the Kelim de Guf of the
previous Partzufim de AK.
You should also know that the Kelim de Nekudim preceded the Orot
since the Kelim de Nekudot de SAG that expanded below from Tabur
de AK, whose Orot departed during Tzimtzum NHY de AK, remained
empty of their Orot. They moved and became the Kelim de Nekudim

--- PAGE 485 ---
since the Kelim that were emptied by the Histalkut Orot in the Guf de
Elyon always became Kelim in the Partzuf Tachton.
In addition, know that all that this speaks of is only the Orot de Gadlut
that came to AVI as additions. However, the Rav does not deal here
with the Orot de Katnut, meaning from Behinat Achor be Achor de
AVI.
It is so because there wasn’t any breaking and annulment in the
Behinat Katnut that emerged in the beginning of its creation. The
entire cancellation, the breaking, and the flaw, was only in the Orot de
Gadlut that came as additions, meaning in the Zivug de Panim be
Panim de AVI, and remember that.
First, all the Orot of the Gadlut came out incorporated in Kli de Keter,
meaning in NHY de Keter. This is because Keter itself, which is the
second Rosh, did not take any part in these Mochin de Gadlut for
itself.
Instead, only because these renewals of Orot necessarily come from
Ein Sof, hence, this new Ohr must cascade from Ein Sof through all
the reasons that precede this Partzuf that receives and extends the new
Ohr. For this reason it is considered descending from Ein Sof and
hanging down degree-by-degree until it comes to the receiver, being
the consequence of all its preceding degrees.
Hence, it is considered that AVI too raised to the Keter, which is the
Behinat Galgalta ve Eynaim de AVI, meaning their Rosh, and Keter to
its own Rosh as well and so on up to Ein Sof. At that time the new Ohr
extended from Ein Sof through the degrees until it came to Behinat
drop of Zivug de Galgalta ve Eynaim in the Keter, which are HB in
the Keter.
The drop clothes in the new NHY de Keter, meaning complete NHY
that can be shown outwardly (Ohr Pnimi item 29, sub header “In that
state”) and these NHY de Keter with the Ohr of the drop of Zivug that
extends from Ein Sof descend and clothe in Mochin de AVI.

--- PAGE 486 ---
Hence, this above Ohr, called drop of Zivug de HB in Keter clothed in
NHY de Keter that descended to Mochin de AVI is considered the
entirety of the Ohr that expands in all five Partzufim of the Nekudim,
since all the degrees of the Nekudim are but a lessening of this general
Ohr. It gradually lessens from degree to degree until it disappears and
departs to its Shoresh.
However, since the Ohr Elyon does not stop, it therefore educes new
Komot as it lessens one below the other until it disappears and rises to
the Maatzil as has been explained in the Histalkut Orot of the previous
Partzufim. Thus, that same Ohr clothed in NHY de Keter is the
entirety of the Ohr of all the Partzufim of Nekudim.
Yet, after NHY de Keter clothed to Mochin in AVI, they have already
departed from Behinat Keter entirely and were considered Kelim de
AVI and Ohr de AVI. Know, that this Koma that emerged first is
considered Komat Keter de AVI.
Here in the Rav’s words it is called Histaklut Eynaim of AVI on each
other. This is because through NHY de Keter that clothed in them for
Mochin and mated Panim be Panim, their Eynaim were opened and
they looked at each other, meaning a Zivug de Gadlut in Komat Keter
de AVI.
Hitpashtut ha Aleph of Komat Keter from above downward is in
Melech ha Daat, and from here on began the Hizdakchut Masach de
Partzuf AVI. This is so because after Melech ha Daat broke, the
Masach was purified from Behina Dalet into Behina Gimel and Komat
Hochma de AVI emerged from below upward.
The Eser Sefirot de Guf expanded from above downward, clothing in
Melech ha Hesed. When Melech ha Hesed broke, the Masach was
purified from Behina Gimel to Behina Bet and Komat Bina of AVI
emerged from below upward.
The Eser Sefirot de Guf expanded from above downward in Melech ha
Gevura, and when Melech ha Gevura broke, the Masach purified from
Behina Bet to Behina Aleph. At that time Behinat Daat de AVI
emerged, meaning Komat ZA. It is also called Behinat Yesodot de AVI

--- PAGE 487 ---
that emerged from below upward, and its Guf expanded in the Upper
third of Melech ha Tifferet.
After the Upper third of Melech ha Tifferet broke, the entire Masach
was purified and rose to its Shoresh to Peh de Nekudim. It was
incorporated there in the Zivug de Rosh and a new Koma de Behina
Bet emerged on it, since the last Behina is always lost during the
Hizdakchut, and this Koma is called YESHSUT.
First emerged the Taamim in it, which are the Rosh and Guf de
Hitpashtut Aleph. The Rosh is called Histaklut Eynaim de YESHSUT
on each other, and you already know that the last Behina de Hitlabshut
remains in the Masach, though it only expands in Kli de Keter, called
Taamim.
Know, that this is what is called Histaklut Eynaim both in AVI and
YESHSUT. In AVI it is always considered Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut
and in YESHSUT it is considered Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut. The
Hitpashtut from above downward in the Behinat Taamim de AVI is
called Melech ha Daat, and the Hitpashtut from above downward de
Behinat Taamim de YESHSUT is called the two lower thirds of
Tifferet.
After Melech ha Tifferet broke, the Masach was purified from Behina
Gimel to Behina Bet and Behinat YESHSUT emerged from below
upward. Their Guf expanded from above downward to the Melachim
NH.
When the Melachim of NH broke, the Masach purified from Behina
Bet to Behina Aleph and Daat de YESHSUT emerged from below
upward, called Yesodot de YESHSUT. Its Guf expanded and descended
to Melech ha Yesod, and when Melech ha Yesod died, the Masach was
purified from Behina Aleph to Behinat Keter.
At that time Komat Malchut emerged from below upward and her Guf
expanded to Malchut de Nekudim. When Kli Malchut de Nekudim
broke, the Masach was purified entirely and rose to its Shoresh in the
Peh where it was once more incorporated there in the Zivug de Rosh.

--- PAGE 488 ---
However, only Aviut de Behina Aleph remained in it since the last
Behina, which is Behina Bet, was lost during the Hizdakchut. Komat
ZA, which is Behinat Daat, whose matter will explained below,
emerged on it, and this Koma of Daat has no Hitpashtut from above
downward, as we shall explain below.
Thus we have briefly explained all the degrees that came out in
Nekudim: the first degree is AVI on Masach de Behina Dalet and
Behina Gimel together. The Taamim in the first Koma expanded in
Melech ha Daat, and the Nekudot in her are the three Komot that
expanded one below the other in the three Melachim Hesed, Gevura,
and the upper third of Tifferet.
Then surfaced the second degree, called YESHSUT. Its Taamim, which
emerged on the two Reshimot Behina Gimel and Behina Bet,
expanded in the two lower thirds of Tifferet. Also, the Nekudot in it are
the three Komot that expanded one below the other in the three
Melachim NH, Yesod, and Malchut.
Then surfaced the third degree, called Daat. It has only Behinat from
below upward, and you should know that these three degrees,
Hochma, Bina, and Daat, are the Neshama, Ruach, Nefesh.
41. The Daat is the first Melech to come out, and all seven were
incorporated in him. You already know that the principal raising
of MAN are the Kelim that were already born in the Olam, hence
thus far, raising MAN was primarily through Daat that emerged
in the Olam first.
We have already explained that in the beginning there was no
need for MAN to AVI, only the ascension of the desire. When it is
written that these seven Melachim were MAN, it does not mean
that they extended Hassadim and Gevurot, since they have already
been extended in the beginning.
The evidence of that is that they returned AVI Panim be Panim,
and afterwards Hochma placed these seven Melachim in Bina.
Thus, we cannot say that they were MAN to Bina, though it means
that they were placing them in Behinat Panim be Panim to AVI

--- PAGE 489 ---
through their raising of MAN, once they were already in Bina. In
addition, in that state they extended the Hassadim and Gevurot
further as in the beginning.
We shall return to the matter that after the Ohr Daat emerged and
entered its Kli, it raised MAN and extended Hassadim and Gevurot
in AVI. This is because Daat consists of Hassadim and Gevurot,
and because the seven Melachim were contained in it at that time.
For this reason it had the strength to lower Hassadim and Gevurot.
However, since the other Melachim do not raise MAN, since the
exit was still not to them, but to the Daat, it is therefore impossible
to lower complete Mochin only through ZON together. Therefore,
what Daat lowered was Behinot Hassadim and Gevurot in Rosh
and Upper AVI in the place of their Daat, resembling him, as he
does.
Ohr Pnimi
41. After the Ohr Daat emerged and entered its Kli, it raised MAN
and extended Hassadim and Gevurot in AVI.
It has already been explained in the previous item that this Daat does
not imply one Sefira of Daat. Rather, it is the first Hitpashtut of the
Zivug de Gadlut de AVI de Nekudim, which is a whole Koma of Eser
Sefirot that came out on Masach de Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut and
Aviut de Behina Gimel.
Its Behinat from below upward is called Histaklut Eynaim de AVI on
each other and there are Eser Sefirot in Komat Keter there. The
Behinat Taamim, meaning the Hitpashtut from above downward
called Guf, is called Melech ha Daat that the Rav speaks of here.
Although there is only Masach de Behina Aleph here in AVI de
Nekudim, it has been explained elaborately (Part 6) that they Hey
Tata’a descended from the Eynaim through Zivug de AB SAG and
came to its place in the Peh, meaning Malchut de Rosh. This is
because in AB, the Hey Tata’a is in its place, hence, when the He’arat

--- PAGE 490 ---
AB was drawn there, it lowered the Hey Tata’a in Nekudim to the
place of Peh as well, and AVI returned to the Rosh.
Know, that when the Hey Tata’a, which is Behina Dalet, came to its
lace, it was erected there with a Masach, as it is in Partzuf AB, which
is Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut and Behina Gimel de Aviut. It is because
that He’arat AB that lowered her to the Peh corrected her with his
Masach too, hence the Eser Sefirot emerged on it in Komat Keter.
However, the Rav wrote that Daat extended in Mochin de AVI only
Hassadim and Gevurot. However, according to the above it should
have extended Eser Sefirot in Komat Keter and Hochma, as it
extended in Partzuf AB.
To understand that we must thoroughly know the matter of Zivug de
Panim be Panim de AVI. Three degrees in Abba ve Ima have been
explained in my words above, until the Zivug de Panim be Panim: The
first is Achor be Achor, meaning the state of AVI de Nekudim in the
beginning. The second is Panim be Achor, and the third is Panim be
Panim.
You find that before AVI return Panim be Panim, they must first be in
a state of Panim be Achor. We have already explained there that that
state of Panim be Achor came by lowering the Hey Tata’a from the
Eynaim to the Peh, at which time AVI return to the Rosh and Abba
acquires its Behinat Panim.
However, Ima is still in her Achoraim, meaning in Hamshacha of Ohr
de Hassadim, since she chooses Hassadim more than Hochma, by way
of “because He delighteth in mercy” (Ohr Pnimi item 23, sub header
“Above it, it is Panim be Achor”).
However, afterwards, when the MAN de Behinat ZON comes to her,
her Shoresh from Ohr Yashar awakens to dispense He’arat Hochma to
these ZON that rose to her. At that time she must stop her Achoraim
and mate Panim be Panim with Abba, dispensing He’arat Hochma to
the ZON (Ohr Pnimi item 24).

--- PAGE 491 ---
Now you can understand why the Daat extends only Hassadim and
Gevurot. It is because these MAN that AVI received from Yesod de AK
are the Behinat Daat that mates AVI. The Vav ו is Hassadim and the
Nekuda is Gevurot, which are Behinot ZON.
Because they are ZON and must have He’arat Hochma, they mate to
AVI. Hence, this is the meaning of the Daat de AVI. Since the whole
matter of the must that Bina needs to extend He’arat Hochma to these
MAN extends only from the original connection de AVI.
Bina de Ohr Yashar extends He’arat Hochma in Hassadim during her
emanation of ZON de Ohr Yashar. Hence, now too she does not
receive from Abba from his Behinat GAR, but from his Behinat ZON,
which are actual He’arat Hochma in Hassadim, like the ZON de Ohr
Yashar, which is in turn the measure that these MAN awakened her to
extend from Abba.
Thus, the whole drop of Zivug de AVI Panim be Panim is not more
than Behinat Hassadim and Gevurot, which are ZON in Gadlut,
meaning Hassadim in He’arat Hochma, but not at all the Atzmut Ohr
de Hochma and Bina. Understand and remember that for it is the key
for all the Mochin of the ZON.
Now you can see that the five Komot that emerged here in AVI
through the Hizdakchut of the Masach are Behinat NRNHY de Haya
de ZON de Nekudim. They are all not more than Behinat Hassadim
and Gevurot, even the Yechida de Haya.
It has been explained that the matter of the Zivug de Panim be Panim
de AVI came in two degrees, which are Panim be Achor and Panim be
Panim. In the beginning, Abba is corrected in GAR, by lowering the
Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim to the Peh. Thus, AVI return to the Rosh
and this Tikun is still insufficient for Ima to turn her Panim back to
Abba.
Because of her Achoraim in the form of “because He delighteth in
mercy” she craves Hassadim more than Hochma. Hence, at that time
AVI stand Panim be Achor, Panim de Abba in the Achoraim de Ima.

--- PAGE 492 ---
Only afterwards, when MAN de Yesod obtains MAN, she returns her
Panim to Abba for the purpose of correcting the MAN in He’arat
Hochma. You already know that even now when she mates Panim be
Panim with Abba, she still does not receive of him more than these
MAN need.
You also know that the Zivug de Hakaa made on the Hey Tata’a that
descended to the Peh, educed Eser Sefirot in Komat Keter, which is
Ohr Yechida de Hochma. Hence, it is considered that the drop of
Zivug that came to the MAN through this Zivug Panim be Panim is the
Behinat measure of ZON de Yechida since the Eser Sefirot de Abba are
in Komat Keter, which is Ohr Yechida.
Since Ima receives from Abba only as much as ZON need, which are
her MAN, hence, this He’arah that she receives is ZON of Yechida de
Abba. Know, that with respect to ZON itself, she is Behinat complete
Yechida for him, and this is the end of ZON’s growth.
That Koma that emerged in Zivug Panim be Panim de AVI on the
Masach de Behina Dalet in the Peh, which is Komat ZON de Yechida
is considered Daat de AVI since she is the principal element that
copulates them. It is not more than Hassadim and Gevurot: the ZA in it
are in the form of Hey Hassadim, and the Nukva in it is in the form of
Hey Gevurot.
All this is the Behinat Rosh, meaning the Behinat Eser Sefirot educed
from below upward. Afterwards, they descend and clothe the Guf from
above downward, meaning in the full amount that they clothed in the
Rosh, and these Eser Sefirot that clothed in the Guf are called Melech
ha Daat. This is the first Hitpashtut of the Nekudim, and it is the
Behinat Taamim de Nekudim.
After Melech ha Daat broke, Behina Dalet purified in the Rosh to
Behina Gimel. It means that Hey Tata’a rose from the place of the Peh
to the place of the Hotem, and the Zivug on the Masach de Behina
Gimel emerged, extended Komat Eser Sefirot up to Hochma, and
Komat Keter disappeared from Abba. For this reason, it is now called
Guf de Abba.

--- PAGE 493 ---
Thus, you now find that when Bina mates with Abba she extends only
ZON de Hochma, since Behinat Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot do
not receive the Ohr Yechida from Abba now, since the Ohr Keter has
vanished from Abba. Instead, they receive Komat Haya, which is the
measure of ZON de Hochma.
For this is reason it is considered that Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot
are the MAN, and ZON descended now from Behinat Rosh de Abba,
which is Yechida to the Behinat Guf de Abba, which is Haya. Also,
their Hitpashtut from above downward into Behinat Guf is called
Melech ha Hesed, which is Behinat ZON de Gadlut in the Ohr Haya.
When Melech ha Hesed broke, the Behina Gimel in the Rosh purified
into Behina Bet, Malchut de Rosh rose to the Awzen, and Eser Sefirot
in Komat Bina emerged. Komat Hochma disappeared, and it is
considered that the Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot descended into
Behinat Guf de Ima, which is Komat Bina.
Now they receive only the measure of ZON de Bina, and the
Hitpashtut of the Eser Sefirot from above downward from this Koma
is called Melech ha Gevura, being Behinat ZON de Gadlut in He’arat
Neshama. Similarly, after Melech ha Gevura broke, the Masach
purified from Behina Bet to Behina Aleph, and Eser Sefirot in Komat
ZA emerged from below upward.
This is considered that the Hey Hassadim and the Hey Gevurot
emerged to Behinot Yesodot de AVI. It expanded into Behinat Guf in
the upper third of Melech ha Tifferet from above downward, and it is
Behinat Ruach Nefesh de ZA.
Now we have thoroughly explained how all five Behinot NRNHY de
Nekudim are only Hassadim and Gevurot, even the Neshama, Haya
and Yechida in them. Even Daat de AVI is only Hassadim and
Gevurot, but the He’arah that it receives from Keter de AVI is
Yechida, the He’arah that it receives from Hochma de AVI is Haya,
and the He’arah that it receives from Bina de AVI is Neshama.
He says, “after the Ohr Daat emerged and entered its Kli, it raised
MAN and extended Hassadim and Gevurot in AVI. This is because

--- PAGE 494 ---
Daat consists of Hassadim and Gevurot.” It means that in Daat in the
Rosh, meaning the MAN that AVI received from Yesod de AK, has only
Hassadim and Gevurot because Ima extended only Behinat He’arah
from Abba for it.
It is similar to the He’arah that there is in ZON de Abba itself from the
Ohr Keter de Abba. For this reason it does not have more than
Hassadim and Gevurot in He’arat Keter de Abba, as the Guf has only
what expands to it from the Rosh.
It has also been explained that this Melech ha Daat is Hitpashtut
Aleph de Olam ha Nekudim, called Taamim, where all the Komot
below it are contained in it, and are only a Behinat diminution from its
Koma. He says, “and because the seven Melachim were contained in it
at that time. For this reason it had the strength to lower Hassadim and
Gevurot.”
This is because the greater part of the entirety of the Hassadim and
Gevurot extended by the MAN de Yesod AK and because of it returned
AVI to a Zivug Panim be Panim. Hence, even after it expanded from
above downward to its place to the Guf to Melech ha Daat, it is
considered the cause for AVI to extend the Zivug de Panim be Panim.
It is so because Ima cannot return to her Behinat Achoraim so that the
He’arat Hochma in it will not be annulled. Hence, Melech ha Daat
too is considered Behinat MAN and the cause of the sustenance and
positioning of AVI Panim be Panim.
Yet, when Melech ha Daat broke and Behina Dalet purified, the entire
Zivug was not cancelled instantaneously, because there still remained
the Aviut de Behina Gimel in the Masach on the path of its gradual
Hizdakchut. Thus, it educes the rest of the Komot to the three
Melachim Hesed, Gevura, and the upper third of Tifferet.
For this reason, the entire Behinat Panim be Panim did not vanish
from AVI, but only their Komat Keter, called Histaklut Eynaim de AVI.
However, Behinat Panim be Panim de Komat Hochma still remained
in it, educed on Behina Gimel of the Masach, which does not belong
to Komat Daat.

--- PAGE 495 ---
He writes, “since the other Melachim do not raise MAN, since the exit
was still not to them, but to the Daat, etc. Therefore, what Daat
lowered was Behinot Hassadim and Gevurot in Rosh and Upper AVI in
the place of their Daat, resembling him, as he does.”
It means that the Behinat Panim be Panim was not entirely cancelled,
only the Koma that is attributed to the Daat, resembling him as he
does. Yet, the Panim be Panim attributed to the other Melachim still
remained in AVI, since they have not come out yet.
42. When this Kli of the Melech called Daat broke, Daat of Upper AVI
too descended in the place of Guf de AVI, but this Kli of Melech
called Daat descended to Olam Beria after it broke. The other six
Orot that were with it entered in the Kli of Melech, called Hesed,
and at that time, Upper AVI were still Panim be Panim.
This is because they do not return Achor be Achor until everything
completes the descent, as they are adhered Panim be Panim. This
adhesion must be removed entirely, and then they will return
Achor be Achor.
However, as long as there is some Dvekut left in them, they do not
return Achor be Achor. We shall explain below the matter of the
complete Dvekut de AVI when they are Panim be Panim, and what
it is about.
When Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot descended from Rosh de
Upper AVI to down in the Guf, it necessarily caused the lack of
Ohr, though they did not return completely Achor be Achor. Also,
the meaning of this lack is the lack of Histaklut Eynaim of AVI on
each other.
Ohr Pnimi
42. He writes, “When this Kli of the Melech called Daat broke, Daat of
Upper AVI too descended in the place of Guf de AVI.”
The concealment of the Ohr Keter is considered, with respect to Abba,
as the concealment of its Behinat Rosh. Therefore, it is considered that
the Behinat MAN that stands at the Rosh of AVI descended to their

--- PAGE 496 ---
Behinat Guf, meaning to Komat Hochma without Keter. It is so
because the Masach purified to Behina Gimel, which elicits merely
Komat Hochma, and what is written, that it fell to Beria, will be
explained below.
The other six Orot that were with it entered in the Kli of Melech,
called Hesed.
It means that it was done by the Zivug on the Masach that was purified
to Behinat Hochma, and the drop of the Zivug de AVI Panim be Panim
of this Koma that descended on the MAN in them. It is regarded as the
measure of the illumination of ZON de Hochma de Abba, considered
its Behinat Haya with respect to the Partzuf de ZON itself, and it
expanded in Melech ha Hesed.
It has already been explained that the Masach purifies and lessens
gradually, degree-by-degree until it elicits six other Melachim, except
Hesed, which are two Komot back in Upper AVI, Behina Aleph and
Behina Bet. These are the Melachim Gevura, the upper third of
Tifferet, and the four Komot in YESHSUT. These are Behina Gimel,
Behina Bet, Behina Aleph, and Behinat Shoresh, which are the two
thirds of Tifferet, NH, Yesod, and Malchut.
All these Komot were incorporated in Behina Gimel over which
Komat Hochma de Abba and Melech ha Hesed came out, since they
gradually lessen from him onward. This is why he says, “The other six
Orot that were with it entered in the Kli of Melech, called Hesed,” as
they are all incorporated in it, as we have explained.
Histaklut Eynaim of AVI on each other.
It has already been explained that this is what Komat Keter of Abba is
called. This is the one that vanishes due to the breaking of Melech ha
Daat, and the resulting Hizdakchut of Behina Dalet. It is because the
Masach appears primarily in the Guf, as it is only in potential in the
Rosh, not in actual fact. Thus, when the Kli broke, the Behinat Masach
was cancelled from that Behinat Aviut that the Kli is from.

--- PAGE 497 ---
43. When the second Melech reigned, which is Hesed, he extended the
Hey Hassadim to expand in Guf de Abba. When he died, he
descended to Beria, and the five Orot descended in Gevura in the
third Melech.
At that time the Achoraim de Abba made by the Hitpashtut of the
above Hey Hassadim fell, and now all of them have fallen. The
Hassadim descended in the Yesod de Abba, Abba returned his
Achoraim to the Panim of Bina, and this Behina is called Achor be
Panim, as the Panim of Bina are now facing the Achoraim of
Hochma.
Ohr Pnimi
43. Hesed, he extended the Hey Hassadim to expand in Guf de Abba.
When he died, he descended to Beria, and the five Orot descended
in Gevura in the third Melech. At that time the Achoraim de
Abba…fell.
This is because when Melech ha Hesed broke, Behina Gimel purified
to Behina Bet, Komat Hochma disappeared, and Eser Sefirot in Komat
Bina came out. It is therefore considered that Hochma turned her
Panim to Achoraim since Behinat Bina is considered Achoraim de
Hochma although it is the Panim of Bina. This is the meaning of,
“Abba returned his Achoraim to the Panim of Bina.”
Abba returned his Achoraim to the Panim of Bina, and this Behina
is called Achor be Panim, as the Panim of Bina are now facing the
Achoraim of Hochma.
This is because the Panim de Ima are Hey Gevurot, as the Rav wrote
above, and they are sweetened by Ohr de Hassadim de Abba. The
matter of the degree of Achor be Panim is written above (Ohr Pnimi
item 23, sub header “Above it, it is Panim be Achor”), and we should
not ask about the Rav’s words there (item 25) that the degree of Achor
be Panim is not conducted in AVI.
This is so because there it concerns the Tikun de AVI in Olam Atzilut,
and at that time they do not need it, and here it is about the diminution

--- PAGE 498 ---
of the Orot and their gradual ascent to the Maatzil. It is not at all
important here if they need it or not, and this is simple.
44. If you say that Partzuf Abba does not complete its descent until the
third of the Tifferet, we must understand that that third of Tifferet
is like Yesod compared to Abba. It is like the ZA with its Mochin
from the perspective of Bina, and you need to understand this
whole study in the same manner as that study, all in one picture,
and then you will understand it.
The entire Yesod is Behinat Panim, having no Achoraim that
descended from it. It is not so in the rest of the body, where there
is Behinat Achoraim that return opposite the Panim of the Nekeva,
though his Achoraim are not adhered with her.
Hence, the Sium Achoraim de Abba complete descending before
there is a blemish and a flaw in Yesod de Abba. Afterwards the
third Melech reigned, which is Gevura, and extended the
Hitpashtut of the Hey Gevurot in the Upper Ima.
When he died, he descended to Beria and the four Orot descended
in the fourth Kli, which is the Tifferet, the Hitpashtut Gevurot fell
in Yesod de Ima and her Achoraim fell below as well. At that time
Ima returned her Achoraim and Achor de Ima were in the Achor
de Abba.
Ohr Pnimi
44. The entire Yesod is Behinat Panim, having no Achoraim that
descended from it.
It means that it has been explained above that only the Behinat Kelim
de Achoraim were cancelled, being all that reached them as additions
to their essential making. This refers to the Behinat Zivug de Gadlut
that emerged because of the descent of the Hey Tata’a from the
Eynaim and the MAN of Yesod de AK.
However, what they had from the very creation, meaning Behina
Achor be Achor de AVI that they had in the beginning, this is called

--- PAGE 499 ---
Kelim de Panim. These were not cancelled and did not descend (item
31).
It has also been explained that after the Masach purified from Behina
Bet to Behina Aleph, the HG fell to Yesodot de AVI, as then Komat
Eser Sefirot de ZA emerged. This Koma de Behina Aleph that came
out in AVI is entirely Panim. In other words, it was incorporated in
Behinat Achor be Achor de AVI that they had in the beginning,
“having no Achoraim that descended from it.” this is because it has
nothing of Behinat Zivug de Gadlut, meaning from Otiot BDK HYH,
which are Behinat Achoraim de AVI.
Achoraim that return opposite the Panim of the Nekeva, though
his Achoraim are not adhered with her.
It means that all that did not depart from Behinat Achor be Achor that
they had in the beginning, is considered Behinat Achoraim that return
opposite the Panim of the Nekeva. This is because their Achoraim are
not cohesive with each other as in the beginning when their Achoraim
were adhered Achor be Achor.
For this reason they are considered Behinat Gadlut and addition from
the Behinot Otiot BDK HYH that descend from Rosh de AVI. This
includes all three degrees above Achor be Achor, which are Achor be
Panim, Panim be Achor and Panim be Panim.
Only the first degree of Achor be Achor whose Achoraim are adhered
with each other, since both use the same wall, this alone is considered
Behinat Kelim de Panim that remained in AVI and were not cancelled.
From that we hear that Behina Bet , which is Komat Bina that Melech
ha Gevura extended from, this Koma too is considered Achoraim, and
it too was cancelled, though in this Behina AVI are Achor be Panim.
However, Yesodot de AVI, which are Behina Aleph, are considered
Achor be Achor and are not counted in the calculation of the
annulment of the Achoraim de AVI. This is because AVI were Achor be
Achor even before the fourth Melech reigned, as the Rav says above.

--- PAGE 500 ---
Gevura, and extended the Hitpashtut of the Hey Gevurot in the
Upper Ima.
This is because Panim de Behina Bet is Hey Gevurot, as the whole of
Ima is Gevurot compared to Abba. For this reason they now stand
Achor be Panim, whose meaning has already been explained above at
length (Ohr Pnimi item 23, sub header “Above it, it is Panim be
Achor”) and study it there.
45. After that the fourth Melech reigned, which is Tifferet. When the
Ohr reached its upper third up to the Chazeh, it extended Behinat
general Hey Hassadim in Yesod Abba and Hey Gevurot in Yesod
Ima.
It is for this reason that Yesod is called “Everything”, as it contains
Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot. We have already explained that
picture; Daat contains Rosh de AVI, Hesed is Guf de Abba, Gevura
is Guf de Ima, and the upper third of Tifferet is the Yesod de AVI.
When the Ohr came to the two bottom thirds of Tifferet, all the
Achoraim of the upper AVI completed their descent, and the
Hassadim and Gevurot continued in the Rosh de Israel Saba ve
Tvuna because this is the place of their Rosh together.
When he died, three Melachim descended in the fifth Kli, which is
Netzah. Then the Hassadim descended from Rosh de Israel Saba,
and Gevurot from Rosh de Tvuna down to its Guf. In addition, the
Behinat Histaklut Eynaim on each other was deducted from
YESHSUT, as it was in Upper AVI.
Ohr Pnimi
45. When the Ohr reached its upper third up to the Chazeh, it
extended Behinat general Hey Hassadim in Yesod Abba and Hey
Gevurot in Yesod Ima.
It is written above that when the Masach de Behina Bet purified after
the breaking of the Kli de Melech ha Gevura into Behina Aleph, being
Komat ZA, the general Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot appeared in

--- PAGE 501 ---
Yesodot de AVI. Also, the Ohr reached the fourth Melech, which is the
upper third of Tifferet down to the Chazeh.
We must still understand the matter of these general Hey Hassadim
and Hey Gevurot in Yesod de Abba ve Ima, and what they mean. You
will understand the matter in what is written in the Zohar, “Ima
expands up to Hod, but has no Yesod.”
The thing is that the Rav has already written in Part 5 (item 33)
regarding Matei ve Lo Matei, that in Hitpashtut Bet, Ohr Hochma
comes in Kli de Keter, and Ohr Bina in Kli de Hochma. Finally, Ohr
Malchut in the Kli of Yesod, and Malchut remains without Ohr.
You find that the Masach de Behina Aleph that educed Komat Ohr
Hassadim expanded only up to Hod, where it purified into Behinat
Shoresh and Komat Malchut emerged on it. This Ohr Malchut clothed
in Kli de Yesod, as it is written at length in Ohr Pnimi there (Part 5,
Ohr Pnimi item 45) and study it there for it is impossible to bring this
length here.
You find that the Ohr Yesod is Behinat Hochma that lacks Hassadim
because all the VAK came out there by Ima in He’arat Hochma in
Hassadim. After the Masach de Behina Aleph purified, there remained
He’arat Hochma alone without any Hassadim, and this is the meaning
of, “Ima expanded only up to Hod,” since the entire Behinat Ima is
only Ohr de Hassadim.
Since the Hassadim have disappeared, she no longer has any
Hitpashtut to shine in Kli de Yesod, but Abba, which is Ohr Hochma,
still shines in Yesod. This is the meaning of Abba being long and
narrow, because he had expanded more than Ima, as the entire
He’arah of Ima has already stopped at Hod, but Abba still illuminates
for Yesod, which is the Ohr Malchut.
This He’arat Abba in the Kli de Yesod is considered the Behinat Hey
Gevurot, as it is written there in Ohr Pnimi, because of the lack of
Hassadim there. The Yesod Abba is narrow because of the Gevurot
from the blockage of Hassadim.

--- PAGE 502 ---
Thus, you will understand that after the Masach purified from Behina
Bet to Behina Aleph, meaning that the Hey Tata’a rose to the Eynaim
once more, which are Behina Aleph de Rosh, the Bina incorporated in
Malchut once more. Hence, Hey Gevurot de Ohr Malchut in the Kli de
Yesod incorporated in her once again (Ohr Pnimi item 23, sub header
“Above it, it is Panim be Achor”).
This is the meaning of, “it extended Behinat general Hey Hassadim in
Yesod Abba and Hey Gevurot in Yesod Ima,” meaning because of the
ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, where they returned Achor be
Achor once more. Hassadim de Abba have no GAR, because of the
Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, and this is the meaning of the general Hey
Hassadim in Yesod de Abba. In addition, Ima was incorporated in the
Ohr Malchut in Kli de Yesod, which is He’arat Hochma without
Hassadim.
The reason they are called the general Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot
and not just Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot, is that it is known that
the Shoresh of everything is the five famous Behinot KHB ZON.
However, they are evaluated by three fundamental modes, evaluated
as Rosh, Toch, Sof.
The five Behinot from the perspective of Ohr Hochma are called KHB
ZON, and the five Behinot from the perspective of Ohr de Hassadim
in He’arat Hochma are called HGT, Netzah and Hod. Behinat Ohr de
He’arat Hochma without Hassadim is called mere Hey Gevurot.
Behinat Hassadim without GAR, or the Behinot Gevurot, protected in
the Achoraim de Ima but are in fact without GAR, as here when the
Hey Tata’a is in the Eynaim above Bina, are also called the general
Hey Hassadim or the general Hey Gevurot, and remember that.
We have yet to understand the matter of the division of the Kli de
Tifferet into two halves, which we did not find in any Sefira. The thing
is that it is known that the three Kelim, Hesed, Gevura, Tifferet, are
Behinat GAR, Keter, Hochma, Bina.
However, they are called HGT since they are Behinot Ohr de
Hassadim. It follows that Kli de Tifferet is Behinat Bina, and Sefirat

--- PAGE 503 ---
Bina is considered two Behinot: the first is called Upper Bina, and the
second is called Tvuna.
The reason it is divided is, as has been explained above (Ohr Pnimi
item 29, sub header “In that state”), that Bina de Ohr Yashar is Ohr
de Hassadim without any Hochma. Moreover, it rejects Hochma since
it wants Hassadim more, by way of, “because He delighteth in
mercy.” However, when she emanated to ZON de Ohr Yashar, she
returned Panim be Panim with the Hochma in order to extend He’arat
Hochma to ZON de Ohr Yashar.
Thus, there are two situations to the Bina de Ohr Yashar: the first is
before she emanated to ZON, when she is in Ohr de Hassadim and her
Achoraim to Hochma, and the second is after she had emanated to
ZON. At that time she is already in Behinat Panim be Panim with
Hochma in order to extend He’arat Hochma to her children, which are
ZON. Thus, these two situations divide Bina de Ohr Yashar into two
separate Behinot. The first is called Bina or Upper Ima, and the second
is called Tvuna.
Now you will thoroughly understand the matter of the division of
Tifferet into two halves on the Chazeh. This is the actual matter of the
division of Bina: from the Chazeh up it is Behinat Upper Ima, whose
Achoraim are toward Hochma, as she chooses Hassadim in the form
of, “because He delighteth in mercy”; and from the Chazeh down it is
in Behinat Tvuna, whose Panim is toward Hochma and she has
He’arat Hochma.
He says, “When the Ohr reached its upper third up to the Chazeh.”
After AVI returned Achor be Achor the Zivug was made on the
Masach that rose to the Ohr Eynaim, and elicited Koma de Behina
Aleph, protected in the Achoraim of Ima that reject Hochma.
The Ohr of this Koma that expanded from above downward to the
Guf, to the Kli de Tifferet, could not expand further there, only up to
the upper third of Tifferet, meaning the Chazeh, where it is the part of
Tifferet that extends from Upper Ima in Behinat Ohr de Hassadim and
in Achoraim on the Hochma.

--- PAGE 504 ---
Yet, in the part of Tifferet from the Chazeh downward, there is the
Behinat Tvuna that extends He’arat Hochma for ZON. Hence, Ohr
Achoraim of the Upper Ima cannot come to clothe there, since it has
already stopped at the Chazeh.
When the Ohr came to the two bottom thirds of Tifferet, all the
Achoraim of the upper AVI completed their decent.
It means that the entire He’arat Partzuf of Upper AVI stopped and
they cannot even shine their Orot Achor be Achor from the Chazeh
downward, since they stop at the Chazeh.
It has been explained that the entire Ohr of Sefirat Hesed is Behinat
Guf de Abba, the Ohr de Sefirat Gevura is Behinat Guf de Ima, and
the Ohr of the Upper third of Tifferet is Behinat Yesodot de AVI. You
should know that the matter of the Hamshacha of the two Gufim de
AVI to the place of these three Sefirot, is in complete accuracy, as that
is their place with respect to the Kelim.
You already know that the three Kelim Hesed, Gevura, Tifferet, are
Behinat KHB de Hassadim. You also know that the whole Komat
Gadlut de Nekudim extends through Zivug de AB SAG, and is
considered Komat AB (Ohr Pnimi item 41, par. “Although there is
only”).
It is known that in AB, Ohr Hochma clothes in Kli de Keter, Ohr Bina
in Kli de Hochma, and Ohr ZA in Kli de Bina. Hence, Guf de Abba,
which is Ohr Bina in Kli de Hesed, being Behinat Keter de Hassadim,
clothed here too.
Guf de Ima, which is the Ohr Bina in Kli de Gevura, being Behinat
Hochma de Hassadim, and Guf de Yesodot AVI, which is Komat ZA,
clothed in the Upper third of Tifferet, which is Behinat Upper Ima de
Hassadim. It could not expand to the two bottom thirds of Tifferet
because it is Behinat Tvuna de Hassadim there; hence it stops at the
Chazeh.
Thus, each Ohr comes precisely to its suitable Kli in the Hey Behinot
de Ohr de Hassadim. He writes, “We have already explained that

--- PAGE 505 ---
picture; Daat contains Rosh de AVI, Hesed is Guf de Abba, Gevura is
Guf de Ima, and the upper third of Tifferet is the Yesod de AVI.” In
other words, it is as has been explained that the three Kelim HGT are
Behinat GAR of the Hey Behinot in the Hassadim.
For this reason they receive from the Upper AVI too, and only the
upper third of the Kli de Tifferet belongs to GAR since from the
Chazeh down it is already Behinat Tvuna.
The Hassadim and Gevurot continued in the Rosh de YESHSUT
because this is the place of their Rosh together.
This is because the Masach was purified from Behina Aleph to
Behinat Shoresh too, and to the Behinat Masach of the Rosh, and was
then incorporated there in the Zivug of the Rosh, as has been explained
in the previous Partzufim (Part 6, Histaklut Pnimit item 15). The Aviut
on the Masach returned, except the last Behina in it, which is Behina
Gimel, of which nothing was left but a Behinat Hitlabshut (there item
14).
Hence, only Behina Bet with Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut remained in
it, which are Zachar and Nekeva, and two Komot came out on them,
Komat Hochma de Zachar, and Komat Bina de Nekeva.
The principal part of the Koma is the attribute of the Nekeva, which is
Behina Bet. This is because Behinat Hochma does not have the Aviut
that could expand from above downward. This Koma is called
YESHSUT, and it is a son and a Tachton to the Upper AVI.
He writes, “and the Hassadim and Gevurot continued in the Rosh de
YESHSUT.” This is because Koma de Behina Bet emerged there on
the Masach from below upward, in Peh de Rosh de AVI.
When the Aviut de Guf in the Masach was recognized, it is considered
that it descended to the place of Guf of AVI, meaning the place of the
Chazeh of the Guf. It elicited Eser Sefirot de Rosh from the Chazeh up
to Peh de AVI, and the Eser Sefirot of their Guf came out from the
Chazeh down, meaning in the place of the two lower thirds of Tifferet.

--- PAGE 506 ---
He writes, “because this is the place of their Rosh together,” meaning
the place of their Rosh is from the place of the Chazeh to the Peh, as
has been clarified in the previous Partzufim (see Part 6, Histaklut
Pnimit item 11 concerning all the operations in the birth of a Partzuf,
as it is impossible to bring here the entire length from there).
Remember what we have explained above regarding the difference
between AVI and YESHSUT, which stems from the Bina de Ohr
Yashar. It is divided into two Behinot: 1 – Before she emanated ZON
de Ohr Yashar, at which time it is only Hassadim without Hochma;
and 2 – after she emanated ZON de Ohr Yashar, at which time she is
Panim be Panim with Hochma because she must extend He’arat
Hochma for ZON.
Hence, the Eser Sefirot de Bina are discerned as dividing into GAR
and ZAT. Her KHB are Behinat the upper half of Bina, from Behinot
Hassadim without Hochma, and her ZON are considered the lower
half of Bina, which is in He’arat Hochma.
Thus, YESHSUT, which are Behinat lower half of Bina, is considered
the ZAT of Bina, meaning her Behinat ZON. They cannot be without
Ohr Hochma since their quintessence is He’arat Hochma, as with
ZON (Ohr Pnimi item 39).
For this reason only YESHSUT are considered the Rosh of ZON
because since Bina extended the He’arat Hochma for ZON, she is
considered Behinat Tvuna, and not as Upper Ima, since Upper Ima is
discerned only before she emanated to ZON. Remember well that
difference between Bina and Tvuna in their origin for you will need it
in all the places.
We might argue that here Upper AVI were Rosh to the ZON, because
their Guf clothed in HGT de ZA. The thing is that in fact, AVI with
YESHSUT are considered one Partzuf, GAR and ZAT.
The issue of their division comes only through the ascent of the Hey
Tata’a to the Eynaim. Hence, since the Hey Tata’a descended from the
Eynaim through the Zivug Panim be Achor, they were both joined into

--- PAGE 507 ---
one Partzuf through the MAN that AVI received from Yesod AK in it
Panim be Panim.
For this reason Upper Ima too received He’arat Hochma into her ZAT,
which is now considered Behinat Upper Ima too. However, now that
the Masach purified into Behina Aleph once more, and the Hey Tata’a
returned to the Eynaim, AVI and YESHSUT were divided into two
Partzufim once more. Now Upper Ima is considered Behinat
Hassadim without Hochma once more, meaning only Behinat Achor
be Achor.
The matter of He’arat Hochma does not belong to her, but to the ZAT
that have now become a separate Partzuf, being YESHSUT. From here
on only YESHSUT are considered the Rosh of ZON, and not Upper
AVI.
Regard and see that even when they were in a single Partzuf, before
the Hey Tata’a rose to the Eynaim, when Upper AVI were still Rosh to
ZON, they still administered only to HGT de ZA, which are as KHB de
Hassadim from the perspective of the Kelim, and not the essence of
ZON. This is because the essence of ZON are Netzah and Hod from
the perspective of the Hassadim; Netzah is ZA, and Hod is Malchut.
Hence, they could only receive from the Rosh of YESHSUT in a way
that GAR de AVI, meaning Upper AVI in addition with the ZAT in a
single Partzuf, administered to GAR de Hassadim. After ZAT de AVI
were cut off from them and became a separate Partzuf named
YESHSUT, they dispensed to ZAT de Hassadim, which are NH, which
are ZON de Hassadim.
The Hassadim descended from Rosh de YESH, and Gevurot from
Rosh de Tvuna down to its Guf.
After the Kli de Tifferet from the Chazeh down died, the Masach de
Behina Gimel that is mingled with the Nekeva purified. At that time,
the Komat Hochma in them disappeared and Hey Hassadim and Hey
Gevurot descended from the Rosh de YESHSUT into Behinat Guf de
YESHSUT. This means that a Zivug was made on the remnants de

--- PAGE 508 ---
Aviut that remained in the Masach, which is Behina Bet that educes
Komat Bina, considered Behinat Guf with respect to Komat Hochma.
However, this does not refer to the actual Behinat Guf, which is from
above downward, since the entire YESHSUT is Behinat Rosh, meaning
Behinat from below upward, and their Guf is TNHYM of the Nekudim,
as the Rav writes here.
The Behinat Histaklut Eynaim on each other was deducted from
YESHSUT.
It has already been explained above that the Koma of the Hitkalelut of
the Nekeva in the Zachar, being Komat Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut
here, is called Histaklut Eynaim on each other, referring to the
Hitkalelut in one another. This Komat Hochma expanded only in Kli
de Tifferet from its Chazeh down since Kli de Tifferet is Behinat Bina
de Hassadim; it is still considered Behinat GAR from the Behinat
Kelim de Hassadim.
For this reason this great Ohr de YESHSUT clothed only it, and not the
Kelim de NH, which are Behinat ZAT, even from the perspective of
Hassadim, which are ZON de Hassadim. You already know that the
Ohr that extends to the Partzuf always clothes the more Zach Kli,
which is most similar to it in Hishtavut Tzura.
46. After that Netzah reigned and extended Hey Hassadim in the Guf
de Israel Saba. When he died, the rest of the Melachim descended
in Hod and the Achoraim de Israel Saba descended, and returned
the Achoraim facing the Panim of Tvuna.
After that Hod reigned. He extended the Hey Gevurot in the Guf de
Tvuna, and when he died, two Melachim came down in Yesod. At
that time the Kelim de NH descended to Beria because both are
only one Melech, “as both or only parts of the Guf.”
Even though they reigned one after the other, they are still
regarded as only one Melech. At that time the Achoraim de Tvuna
descended too and Israel Saba ve Tvuna returned Achor be Achor.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 509 ---
46. Netzah reigned and extended Hey Hassadim in the Guf de Israel
Saba.
It is written above regarding AVI, that the MAN of ZON extend only
Hassadim and Gevurot. It is the same here too since the same MAN
that were in Upper AVI later descended into Behinat Zivug de
YESHSUT. Also, it has already been explained that Behinat Eser
Sefirot de Guf that expand from Guf de Israel Saba, come in the
Melech of Netzah.
Both are only one Melech.
This is so because both extend from the Behinat Guf de YESHSUT,
meaning Masach de Behina Bet, hence they are one Koma and one
Melech.
Achoraim de Tvuna descended too and Israel Saba ve Tvuna
returned Achor be Achor.
This is because when the Melachim of NH died, the Masach purified
from Behina Bet to Behina Aleph and the Hey Tata’a returned in the
Eynaim. At that time they returned Achor be Achor meaning to
Behinot Achoraim of Upper Ima in order to protect the lack of GAR in
them.
47. After that reigned the sixth Melech, which is Yesod. He extended
the general Hey Gevurot in Yesod Tvuna and general Hey
Hassadim in Yesod Israel Saba. When he died, these Behinot
descended too.
After that reigned the seventh Melech, which is the Malchut, only
in her own Kli. She extended general Hey Hassadim in Malchut de
Israel Saba and general Hey Gevurot in Malchut Tvuna, since
Malchut too has a generality, as in Yesod.
He too is called Kala (lit. Bride), as the Yesod is called Kol (lit.
Everything), and when she died the general Hey Hassadim and
Hey Gevurot descended from Malchut de Israel Saba and from
Malchut de Tvuna, and the Kli de Malchut descended to Beria.

--- PAGE 510 ---
Now all the Achoraim of the four Partzufim de AVI of Israel Saba
ve Tvuna completed their descent entirely.
Ohr Pnimi
47. Yesod. He extended the general Hey Gevurot etc. After that reigned
the seventh Melech, which is the Malchut.
When the Zivug was made in Behina Aleph, they expanded in Kli de
Yesod and extended the general Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot in
Yesodot de YESHSUT, as has been explained above in AVI. After
Melech ha Yesod died, the Masach was purified into Behinat Shoresh,
and Komat Malchut came out in YESHSUT, and the Ohr descended
into Kli Malchut from above downward, which is the seventh Melech.
48. If you say, “Why were the general Hassadim and Gevurot not in
the general account of the Upper AVI as they were counted in
Malchut de Israel Saba ve Tvuna?” We must understand that it is
known that the Behinat Atara is in the Upper third of Tifferet,
which is the Behinat Malchut, and she is incorporated in Yesod.
Here, however, she, the Malchut de Tvuna, is more revealed than
Malchut de Bina. This is because Malchut de Tvuna is actually
Malchut with respect to the general Bina and Tvuna together in
one Partzuf, but the Malchut of the Upper Bina is Behinat Guf of
the generality. It is the place of the Chazeh of Tifferet of the
generality of Partzuf Bina and Tvuna together, and it is not the
actual Malchut.
Ohr Pnimi
48. Malchut de Tvuna is actually Malchut with respect to the general
Bina and Tvuna together etc. but the Malchut of the Bina is
Behinat Guf of the generality.
Interpretation: Upper Ima and Tvuna are indeed Behinat Eser Sefirot
with respect to Bina de Ohr Yashar. Upper Ima is GAR, and the Tvuna
is ZAT. However, they were divided because of the ascent of the Hey
Tata’a in the Eynaim, hence Malchut de Tvuna is the Malchut of both
Ima and Tvuna together.

--- PAGE 511 ---
Yet, Malchut of the Upper AVI “is Behinat Guf of the generality. It is
the place of the Chazeh of Tifferet of the generality of Partzuf Bina
and Tvuna together, and it is not the actual Malchut.” It means that
afterwards, in Atzilut, Tvuna clothes from Chazeh of Upper Ima
downward, and the place of the Chazeh, Behinat Guf of the generality
of both, and she is not Bina.
According to the above, you will understand the matter thoroughly. It
has been explained that Upper Ima expands through Hod. However,
she does not have Yesod (Ohr Pnimi item 45). This is because the
Hassadim stop there and there is only He’arat Hochma there without
Hassadim, which is not at all the Behina of Ima, as she is the opposite,
Behinat Hassadim without Hochma.
Hence, Upper AVI extended only through the Zivug of the Masach de
Behina Aleph where there is still Ohr de Hassadim there anyhow. Yet,
after the Masach of Behina Aleph purified, their He’arah stopped
entirely because she has no Hitpashtut without Hassadim, and Komat
Malchut could not come out in Upper AVI. Only in YESHSUT, after it
was distinguished as a distinct Partzuf, Komat Malchut could emerge
without He’arat Hassadim.
49. *When the third of Tifferet still hasn’t died, the descent and fall of
the Achoraim de Abba ve Ima was not completed. When these
Melachim entered their Kli, they were revealed in a great Ohr.
However, after the Upper third of Tifferet died, the Achoraim de
AVI fell there. When the rest of the remaining Orot came out in
order to enter in their Kli, they were clothed in these Achoraim
that fell and remained in Atzilut, and the last Melachim came out
clothed in the Achoraim of AVI.
This remained for them always until all the scrutinies could
emerge in the future. This is the meaning of the raising of MAN
that ZON raise to Abba ve Ima, and it is from these Achoraim de
AVI that descended there below in Atzilut itself that they took.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 512 ---
49. When the rest of the remaining Orot came out in order to enter in
their Kli, they were clothed in these Achoraim that fell.
The matter of these Achoraim of AVI has already been explained.
They are all the Behinot of Gadlut that were in AVI with respect to
Panim be Achor and with respect to Panim be Panim. All this came
down from Behinat Rosh and they were made into Behinot HGT
without a Rosh.
This is so because their Behina from above downward, which is the
Guf, which are the four Melachim Daat HGT through the Upper third
of Tifferet, broke and fell to BYA. As a result, the MAN that operated in
the Rosh were blemished too, fell with their Orot, and lost the He’arat
Hochma in them, obtaining Behinot HGT without a Rosh.
However, they did not descend outside Atzilut because of that, like the
Kelim de ZAT, because the Achoraim de AVI that still remain above
the Behinot Achor be Achor, meaning from what they’d had prior to
the Gadlut, all this remains in its full completeness. Hence the Behinot
Gadlut de AVI that fell to HGT were also protected in those Achoraim
from Achor be Achor de Rosh.
Yet, there is a big difference between AVI Achor be Achor that
remained in the Rosh. This is because those that remained in the Rosh
were never restricted because of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim.
Rather, these Behinot de Gadlut already extended He’arat Hochma,
and departed from them once more due to the ascent of the Hey Tata’a
in the Eynaim, though they received the Tikun of the Achoraim de
Rosh after they had suffered the corruption. For this reason they are
discerned as receiving from the Rosh and are considered Guf.
In spite of that, these Achoraim that fell to HGT and became Behinot
new Kelim, corrected in Tikun Kavim, are considered to be like AVI of
Rosh, since they receive from the Rosh. This is because the Achoraim
de Ima corrects them in Tikun Kavim and connects them into one knot.
It means that the middle line that extends from Upper Bina in Ohr
Hassadim unites the right and the left, and sentences them in her
He’arat GAR as well.

--- PAGE 513 ---
All three Kavim are united by the influence of Ohr de Hassadim
because the Elyonim too receive their completion through them. Here
you must remember that the Elyonim are Hesed and Gevura, which
are of the value of Hochma and Bina.
Tifferet is considered the Tachton that receives Ohr de Hassadim from
Upper Bina that have Behinat GAR in her Levush of Achoraim. By so
doing, the Hesed and Gevura that require He’arat GAR are completed
too.
It has been explained above that Rosh de YESHSUT clothes from the
Chazeh de Nekudim to Peh de AVI de Nekudim. Thus, Rosh de
YESHSUT clothes these Achoraim de AVI, which is similar to AVI de
Atzilut that clothe HGT de AA de Atzilut, and these HGT administer all
their wholeness to AVI de Atzilut. Similarly, here the Achoraim de AVI
that fell to HGT became the Pnimiut to Rosh de YESHSUT, from
which it sucks its wholeness.
He writes, “When the rest of the remaining Orot came out in order to
enter in their Kli. They were clothed in these Achoraim that fell and
remained in Atzilut, and the last Melachim came out clothed in the
Achoraim of AVI.” This is because the Orot de Rosh de YESHSUT
themselves were clothed in these Achoraim, as they clothe them in
their Pnimiut. Hence, their Gufim too, which are the four Melachim
TNHYM clothe these Achoraim de AVI too.
You must know that there is a great difference between the Achoraim
de AVI that fell and the Rosh de YESHSUT. This is because these
Achoraim come from Behinat Rosh de AVI, but because of the blemish
of the breaking of the vessels, they descended to HGT.
Although the Orot came out on the Masach de NHY de AK, which are
Behinot ZON, yet the MAN do not act at all in the Rosh, since they are
there in Behinat from below upward. Hence, these Orot de Gadlut that
came out on the MAN are considered Behinat AVI, and do not consist
of the Atzmut Hey Tata’a.
Rosh de YESHSUT came from the Masach de Guf of the Nekudim,
meaning from the Masach de Chazeh, which are the Kelim and the

--- PAGE 514 ---
Orot that expanded from the MAN de NHY de AK from above
downward. Thus, the Hey Tata’a is actually mixed in them, and for
this reason these YESHSUT clothed the HGT de Nekudim themselves,
these did not break.
Therefore, now these YESHSUT gain much since they clothe the
Achoraim de Ima and they really are a higher degree than they. Yet,
because of their fall, it became possible for YESHSUT to clothe them.
This remained for them always until all the scrutinies could
emerge in the future.
It means that these Achoraim are always made Behinot Levushim for
Mochin to the Orot of ZON. Through them, ZA can obtain all its
degrees and is protected in them. Were it not for these Levushim, ZA
would not have been able to obtain any Mochin, and therefore it needs
them until “in the future”, meaning until it obtains all its degrees,
which is at Gmar Tikun.
Raising of MAN etc. from these Achoraim de AVI that descended
there etc.
The matter of raising MAN when AVI do not mate Panim be Panim
but through raising MAN has already been explained above (Ohr
Pnimi item 24). Since Upper Ima is in the Achoraim to Abba in the
form of “because He delighteth in mercy,” she does not stop her
Achoraim except by raising MAN de ZON that awaken her to
administer them He’arat Hochma. For them she stops her Achoraim
and returns Panim be Panim with Abba.
There was already He’arat Hochma of ZON in these Achoraim that
fell from AVI, which were already Behinat Yechida, Haya, Neshama
for ZON (Ohr Pnimi item 41, par. “It has been explained”). Hence,
when ZON rises to MAN, it returns and scrutinizes scrutinies from
Neshama, Haya, Yechida, that are in these Achoraim, and raises them
to MAN for him to AVI.
This is because when it raises scrutinies de Neshama to MAN,
meaning from that part of the Achoraim that has already served there

--- PAGE 515 ---
in AVI in the form of Komat Bina, you find that it causes Zivug Panim
be Panim de Neshama to AVI. When it raises from scrutinies of Haya,
meaning from that part of Achoraim that has already served there in
AVI in Behinat Komat Hochma, that causes the return of Panim be
Panim to AVI in Behinat Haya. Also, it raises scrutinies de Yechida
from them of the needs of Yechida.
50. You find that these Orot from the Chazeh down come covered and
you already know that the concealment of the Ohr and its
covering is the reality of its Tikun. This is because by so doing,
there is power in the Kli to tolerate the Ohr, as it comes clothed.
Hence, the breaking of the Kelim from the Chazeh down, which
are the two bottom thirds of Tifferet and NHY and Malchut, is not
like the breaking of the Kelim of Daat and HG and the Upper third
of Tifferet. This is because the breaking of the Elyonim would
certainly be greater than the breaking of the Tachtonim.
Thus, when the Tikun of ZA came, during the Tikun of its Partzuf,
it came the opposite. This is because its Orot and the Hassadim
were disclosed from the two thirds of Tifferet downward, since
they have an ability to receive them not through Masach Bina,
since their breaking was not great.
However, the Elyonim, which are from the Rosh de ZA through the
Chazeh, now they came blocked and clothed in the Tikun inside
Masach Bina, which is her Yesod. This is because in the beginning
they were disclosed and their breaking was great. Though the NH
are covered and blocked, it has been explained that the disclosed
Hassadim strike them and their Ohr comes out.
Ohr Pnimi
50. These Orot from the Chazeh down come covered.
This means that the Behinat GAR in them is covered in the Achoraim
de Ima. Here you must know that the complete Tikun de ZON is that
their GAR will be covered in the Achoraim de Ima, and their ZAT will
be disclosed. This is because then their Eser Sefirot are corrected like

--- PAGE 516 ---
the Eser Sefirot de Bina de Ohr Yashar, as Bina de Ohr Yashar
consists of Eser Sefirot as well, Keter and Hochma above her and ZAT
below her, which are her Behinot ZON, called Tvuna (Ohr Pnimi item
45, par. “We have yet to understand”).
It explains there that from the time Bina began to extend He’arat
Hochma for ZON, it is already considered Tvuna, and as her ZAT,
meaning the Shorashim that remained in Bina that ZAT left in her after
they left to their place. Yet, Bina herself is considered as it is in the
beginning of its creation, meaning in Ohr de Hassadim and her
Achoraim to Hochma.
Thus, GAR de Bina are covered with her Achoraim and only her ZAT
manifested in He’arat Hochma. Hence, when ZA is also corrected like
her and his ZAT are disclosed in He’arat Hochma, it is then in a
complete Tikun.
He writes, “these Orot from the Chazeh down come covered and you
already know that the concealment of the Ohr and its covering is the
reality of its Tikun.” It means that because Rosh de Tvuna already
clothes the Achoraim of the Upper Abba ve Ima that are corrected in
Tikun Kavim (Ohr Pnimi item 49, par. “In spite of that”), hence, each
of the Orot de TNHYM that expanded from them has Eser Sefirot.
Also, their GAR were covered in the Achoraim de Ima and there was
only Behinat He’arat Hochma in their ZAT, which is like the Eser
Sefirot de ZA during its Tikun.
He writes, “the concealment of the Ohr and its covering is the reality
of its Tikun,” as thus the Tikun rises in ZA de Atzilut too. However, the
Orot de HGT that did not have any Tikun from the Achoraim de Ima,
but their entire Eser Sefirot were revealed, and even the GAR in each
of them, for that reason their breaking was harder than NHY.
During the Tikun of its Partzuf, it came the opposite.
It is because in the Tikun, you find that its HGT are corrected in
Achoraim de Ima, which is the Masach de Yesod Ima, clothed in its
Tifferet through the Chazeh. Also, from the Chazeh down the He’arat

--- PAGE 517 ---
Hochma in Hassadim appears in it, meaning that its GAR, which are
HGT, is covered with a Masach and NHY, which are ZAT de ZA.
In addition, the Hassadim are exposed, which is the opposite of ZA de
Nekudim, whose HGT were completely exposed, and whose NHY
were covered. This Tikun began in NHY de Nekudim that came out
clothed in Achoraim de Ima, and ended in Olam Atzilut.
The disclosed Hassadim strike them and their Ohr comes out.
This is because the Hassadim appear only in the middle line de ZA,
which is through Yesodot de AVI that are clothed there, though
Achoraim de Ima control the Ktzavot. However, the Ohr Hozer rises
from below upward, strikes the two Kavim right and left, and educes
their Orot outwardly. Know, that these Orot that come out because of
the Hakaa are the Orot de NHY of each and every Sefira that were
there in each of them in the form of “and all their hinder parts were
inward.”
It means that they were incorporated in the HGT of each one (Ohr
Pnimi item 28, sub header “This is the essential drop”). Now,
through the Hakaa of disclosed Hassadim from the middle line in the
Sefirot de Ktzavot, the NHY of each can come out of the Hitkalelut of
HGT and appear outwardly in Behinat Achoraim that are completed in
He’arat Hochma that no longer have any fear from the sucking of the
exteriors.
You already know that Hakaa means lessening because when two
opposite Orot meet each other, they lessen one another, and as a result,
a new He’arah is born. So it is here, because since the disclosed
Hassadim in He’arat Hochma is opposite to the Sefirot in the two
Ktzavot, where because of the Achoraim de Ima they are found to
reject Hochma, hence they beat on each other. As a result of their
Hakaa, new NHY in He’arat Hochma are born and appear, and the
rest of the matter will be explained in its place.
51. In the death of ZA, the Achoraim of AVI descended to its Upper
third de Tifferet, but the Achoraim of Israel Saba ve Tvuna were
not completed until the death of Nukva de ZA. Hence, the ZA takes

--- PAGE 518 ---
the Achoraim de AVI, and Malchut takes the Achoraim de Israel
Saba ve Tvuna, and their Orot clothe in them like the Mochin de
ZA.
52. Now you will understand what is written, that when the ZON are
equal together Panim be Panim, then Netzah and Hod de AVI are
Mochin to ZA and the NHY de Israel Saba ve Tvuna are Mochin,
and enter in Rosh de Nukva.
Ohr Pnimi
52. Netzah and Hod de AVI are Mochin to ZA and the NHY de Israel
Saba ve Tvuna are Mochin, and enter in Rosh de Nukva.
This does not mean that NHY of the Upper AVI de Atzilut become
Mochin for ZA. This is utterly impossible since no Partzuf receives
Mochin but only from its Elyon, not from its Ali Elyon.
The Elyon of ZA are YESHSUT and not AVI, which are its Ali Elyon.
Rather, it means that AVI become one Partzuf with YESHSUT, as it
was here in AVI de Nekudim.
At that time NHY de YESHSUT that are clothed in it for Mochin are
discerned as NHY de AVI. This is because then YESHSUT became the
actual Guf de AVI, hence its HGT are considered receiving from their
Behinat Gufim, such as the reception of the Gufim de AVI by HGT de
Nekudim.
This is through what ZA clothes in the Achoraim de AVI that fell to
their place, as the Rav says. However, Nukva de ZA cannot receive as
he does since Nukva has no Shoresh in HGT, and her entire Atzmut
begins from Chazeh de ZA downward, meaning only NHY.
This too came to her through her Hitkalelut in ZA, since she is merely
Behinat Hod at her Shoresh. Yet, the completion of her Gadlut is to
receive like the reception of NHY de Nekudim of the Behinat Gufim de
YESHSUT, which is the final level of Partzuf NHY.
At that time they are the two great Lights that do not need each other
since the Nukva receives Partzuf NHY from Behinat Guf de YESHSUT
like the NHY de Nekudim. Also, ZA receives its Partzuf HGT from

--- PAGE 519 ---
Behinat Guf of the Upper AVI that are connected with YESHSUT like
the HGT de Nekudim.
As HGT de Nekudim and NHY de Nekudim did not need each other, so
ZA and Nukva will not need each other. Hence, ZA will no longer
control the Nukva and will not be considered greater than her, since
she does not need him.
53. You will also understand what is written, that when they were
Panim be Panim, two Behinot Ya’akov come out, one in ZA and
one in Nukva. It is so because the one that is from Mochin de ZA is
from AVI, and the other, which is from Mochin de Nukva is from
Israel Saba ve Tvuna.
At that time they are the two great Lights, she is not greater than
him, and he is not greater than her, and they do not need each
other at all. Nevertheless, the Achoraim of Abba are on the right
hand side, in Hesed de ZA, and the Achoraim de Ima are on the left
hand side, in Gevura de ZA, and this study will be addressed in its
place.
54. Here in this place is the place of the descent and the fall of the
Achoraim of AVI, as we have said above that they descended in
Atzilut itself. Even though the Kelim de ZA broke, yet the Orot de
ZA remained clothed in these Achoraim of the Upper AVI, the
entire Kav Hesed de ZA in the Achoraim of Abba, and the entire
Kav Gevura clothed in the Achoraim de Ima, and study this
introduction thoroughly.
Ohr Pnimi
54. The Orot de ZA remained clothed in these Achoraim of the Upper
AVI.
This is because after the breaking of the vessels through the Upper
third of Tifferet, when all the Achoraim of the Upper AVI had
descended, they expanded in the place of Kelim de HGT and were
corrected in Gimel Kavim, right, left, and middle. At that time the Orot
de HGT rose and clothed these Kelim; Ohr Hesed in the right Kav,

--- PAGE 520 ---
Ohr Gevura in the left Kav, and the Ohr of the Upper third of Tifferet
in the middle Kav.
55. *Now we shall explain how during the demise of these Melachim,
their Kelim descended to Olam Beria, which is not so in the four
Achoraim de AVI. Now we have explained the division that was
between AVI and the seven Melachim, which are ZON.
We have said that the seven Melachim that actually died
descended to Olam Beria, and their Kelim and the Achoraim of
AVI were cancelled and did not die. Instead, they descended below
in Olam Atzilut itself. We have explained the reason for it there,
and said that it became the reason that the seven Melachim did
not received Orot AHP de AK, but only from its Guf onward.
56. The reason for this itself was also another difference between
GAR, which are KHB, and the seven bottom Melachim. It is so
because the GAR first came out with a little Tikun, since when
they first came out, they expanded in an order of Gimel Kavim.
It is not so with the ZAT that came out one below the other, and
this is the meaning of what is written in the Idra Raba, “How long
will we sit in the keeping of one pillar?” He wishes to say, that the
Tikun, which is through Kavim, was made, but prior to that, when
they were one atop the other, there existed the one Kav.
We have already explained that the Tikun of Atzilut, since it is
made of VAK, is made in the form of three Kavim, tied and
connected to one another, in the form of the third that decides
between them. At that time it is called “single authority”.
Yet, when they are atop the other and they are separated from one
another, at that time it is called “multiple authorities”. For this
reason, the Achoraim of the GAR were cancelled and did not die,
and the seven Melachim died Panim and Achor, since they came
out without any Tikun at all.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 521 ---
56. When they first came out, they expanded in an order of Gimel
Kavim.
It has already been explained above that the matter of Tikun Kavim
begins by the force of the He’arat Achoraim de Ima (Ohr Pnimi item
49, par. “Yet, there is a big difference”).
It is known that AVI de Nekudim first came out in Behinat Achor be
Achor. It means that they were corrected in the Ohr Achoraim of the
Upper Bina, hence they were not blemished by the Hey Tata’a that
rose to the Eynaim, and remained in Behinat GAR de Bina (Ohr Pnimi
item 23).
This Tikun is called Tikun Gimel Kavim, where each three, right, left,
and middle, come up as one, which is the He’arat GAR by the force of
the Achoraim de Bina. For this reason they are considered connected
to one another in one knot.
We must also thoroughly note the matter of their division into two
Ktzavot and the sentencing between them, since there is a great
interest in that. The thing is that through the ascent of the Hey Tata’a
to the Eynaim, which are Hochma, Malchut was incorporated in each
and every Sefira of the Eser Sefirot. For this reason a Behinat Nukva
and Kli was made in each and every Sefira.
Because of that, it is considered that there is Behinat right and left in
each Sefira, meaning Hesed and Din. This is because the Sefira itself
is Behinat Hesed, and the force of Malchut that was mingled in it
through the ascent of Hey Tata’a to the Eynaim is the Behinat Din in
the Sefira.
Hence, AVI de Nekudim too are considered right and left, meaning the
Kav of Hesed, which is Hochma and Abba, and the Kav of Din, which
is Bina and Ima. AVI had no GAR with respect to these two Kavim.
Hence the Ohr Achoraim of the Upper Bina was drawn to them in
Behinat deciding Kav in the middle of them.
This Ohr Achoraim is considered Behinat middle, and determining.
This is because for itself, there is no distinction between right and left,

--- PAGE 522 ---
since the whole difference in the Ktzavot is because the left is the Kav
of Din, for lack of Ohr Hochma that is fitting for the right Kav. This
refers to the GAR de Hochma that cannot receive because of the
mixture of the Hey Tata’a inside it since they are two Ktzavot that
deny one another.
However, this Kav that extends from Bina, rejects Ohr Hochma in any
case, meaning even if there had not been Behinat Din there. Thus you
find that it is in equivalence with the two Ktzavot together, and in that
the right Kav complements the Behinat GAR that it lacks, which is
Hochma.
In addition, it sweetens the left and connects it with the right in
complete unification since it no longer contradicts it. Thus, the two
Kavim right and left are connected and corrected by the Achoraim de
Ima, which is the middle line (Ohr Pnimi item 49, par. “Yet, there is a
big difference”).
He writes, “the GAR first came out with a little Tikun, since when they
first came out, they expanded in an order of Gimel Kavim.” It means
that in the beginning, they emerged in correction of Achor be Achor,
and this Tikun means Tikun Kavim.
ZAT that came out one below the other.
It is because ZAT did not come out from AVI with respect to their
being in Behinat Achor be Achor, but they emerged from a Zivug of
Panim be Panim de AVI. Hence, there was no connection between
them whatsoever, but each Sefira was its own Guf. Hesed was Guf de
Abba, and Gevura was Guf de Ima etc. because they lacked the Tikun
Achoraim de Ima, which is the tie that connects all the ends together.
VAK, is made in the form of three Kavim, tied and connected to
one another, in the form of the third that decides between them.
As has been explained in the previous item, the beginning of the Tikun
was made in HGT, in the form of NHY de Ima. At that time the NHY
too are integrated in them in the form of, “their hinder parts were
inward.” Hence, even afterwards, when the Achoraim are completed

--- PAGE 523 ---
from the perspective of the He’arat Hochma too, still the first Tikun
de Achoraim de Ima remains in them. This is because they come from
the essence of the beginning of its creation and does not undergo a
change, as every thing that comes from the beginning of its creation
never changes, as is known in the Rav’s words.
57. Let us explain the order of the emanation of the seven Melachim.
We shall begin with the first, which is the Daat, which emerged
first. When the Kli could not endure, the Kli broke and descended
in Olam ha Beria, meaning in the place that was to be Olam Beria
afterwards, since Olam Beria was not created yet.
Also, this Kli fell in the place of Daat de Beria, as it relates to it
similarly. However, the Ohr of the Daat descended too, but
remained in Atzilut itself, in the place of Kli Malchut of the Atzilut.
Ohr Pnimi
57. This Kli fell in the place of Daat de Beria, as it relates to it
similarly.
The reason for the breaking has already been thoroughly clarified
above, and for this reason they were separated from the Kedusha.
In the matter of their fall to the three Olamot BYA that the Rav
mentioned, although they still weren’t these three Olamot at all,
nevertheless, their Reshimo was already evident. This is because they
are the Behinat three Sefirot Bina, ZA, and Malchut of NHY de Sium
that went outside Atzilut de AK during Tzimtzum Bet (as written at
length in Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 7).
Since each of these Melachim consisted of Eser Sefirot, which are
Rosh, Toch, Sof, the Rosh fell to Beria, their Toch fell to Yetzira, and
their Sof fell to Assiya. The Rav writes that the Kli of Daat fell to Daat
de Beria, meaning its Behinat Rosh, which is KHBD de Daat, but its
HGT fell to Yetzira, and its NHYM fell to Assiya. You will understand
the matter of the fall of all seven Melachim similarly.
As it relates to it similarly.

--- PAGE 524 ---
This is because there are Eser Sefirot in each Olam of the three
Olamot BYA, hence the Kli de Melech ha Daat fell to Daat de Beria,
meaning to its corresponding Behina.
The Ohr of the Daat descended too, but remained in Atzilut etc. in
order to shine from afar in its Kli that stands in Beria.
Know, that this Ohr that the Rav says means the Reshimo that
remained of the Ohr Daat after its Histalkut from the Kli. This is
because every Ohr leaves a Reshimo after its Histalkut, and thus
shines to the Kli so that it will not be cancelled and not die, as the Rav
said (Part 4, Chap 2, items 2, 8).
The Rav tells us that the Reshimo of Daat did not actually remain in
the Kli, as it did in the previous Partzufim, but remained in Atzilut. He
writes, “the breaking was in the Kelim and not in the Orot etc. and it is
in Behinat Tagin on the Otiot.” This is because for some reason, the
Ohr of the Reshimo cannot clothe inside the Kli and it shines to the Kli
from afar, called Tagin, as the Rav says above (Part 4, Chap 3, item
11).
58. However, it did not come down there because of a flaw in it, as it
has been explained above that the breaking was in the Kelim and
not in the Orot, while its descent was there due to a flaw. We
should attribute the cancellation to the Orot, as we similarly
attributed the cancellation to the Kelim de Achoraim de AVI that
fell in Atzilut itself.
However, their descent was in order to shine from afar in its Kli
that stands in Beria, so that it would not die entirely and would
remain hopeless. For this reason it shines in it from afar while it
stands in Atzilut, and it is in Behinat Tagin on the Otiot.
59. Afterwards Hesed came out, the Kli broke and descended in Bina
de Beria, and the Ohr descended in the place of the Kli of Yesod de
Atzilut. This is because the Ohr Daat preceded to take the place of
Malchut.

--- PAGE 525 ---
After that Gevura came out and broke, the Kli descended in
Hochma de Beria, and the Ohr descended in Kli de Netzah Hod de
Atzilut, which are two parts of the Guf.
After that Tifferet came out and broke, the Kli descended in Keter
de Beria, and the Ohr remained in its place, which is in Tifferet de
Atzilut.
Ohr Pnimi
59. Hesed came out, the Kli broke and descended in Bina de Beria,
and the Ohr descended in the place of the Kli of Yesod de Atzilut.
This is because the Ohr Daat preceded to take the place of
Malchut.
It means that when the Orot are clothed in the Kelim, it is considered
that the one that is more Av than the other, is greater than the other.
This is because it is known that the one whose Masach is more Av
educes a greater Koma. Yet, when the Kelim are empty of Orot, their
Aviut is considered a demerit, hence it is considered the opposite, that
the purer is more important.
He writes, “and the Kli de Hesed fell to Bina de Beria.” This is
because the Kli de Daat extends from a Zivug on Masach de Behina
Dalet, connecting the Behina Gimel (see Ohr Pnimi item 41), and the
Kli de Hesed extends from Zivug on Behina Gimel only.
You find that the Kli de Hesed is more Zach than the Kli de Daat,
hence the Kli de Hesed is considered above the Kli de Daat, meaning
it is more important than it, as it is more Zach. He writes, “and the
Ohr descended in the place of Yesod.” This is because according to the
value of the Reshimot that clothe them, hence, the Reshimot are also
appreciated according to the importance of the Kelim.
Gevura came out and broke, the Kli descended in Hochma de
Beria.
This means that the one that is purer than the other is more important
than the other. It is so because after the Histalkut of the Ohr from the
Kelim, the Aviut is regarded as lowness. Similarly, the Kli de Tifferet

--- PAGE 526 ---
too is more important than the Kli Gevura, hence it fell to Keter de
Beria.
Thus, the four Kelim: Daat, Hesed, Gevura, and Tifferet, fell to KHBD
de Beria, which are GAR of Beria like the Kelim DHGT that were the
GAR of ZON. However, they fell in oppositeness of degree.
This means that Daat is below them all, as it is the most Av, hence its
breaking is the hardest. Kli de Hesed is less than that, as it is only
from Behina Gimel de Aviut, and Kli Gevura, which is only from
Behina Bet de Aviut, is less than that. The breaking of Kli de Tifferet is
the least of all, since it is only from Behina Aleph de Aviut.
All the Reshimot of the Kelim fell similarly: the Reshimo de Daat in
Malchut de Atzilut, meaning below everyone at the Sium of the Atzilut.
Atop it is the Hesed, in Yesod de Atzilut, and atop that is the Gevura in
Netzah Hod de Atzilut. Above all is the Tifferet, which remained in its
place, meaning in Tifferet de Atzilut, meaning with respect to the
Kelim.
De Netzah Hod de Atzilut, which are two parts of the Guf.
Only while they are still in Behinat Achoraim, lacking He’arat
Hochma. However, when they are in Behinat Panim, meaning when
there is He’arat Hochma in them, they are considered two separate
Sefirot from one another.
You will find the reason for it in the Rav’s words (Part 5 items 42, 43).
He says there that Sefirat Netzah extends from VAK de Keter, at which
time Lo Matei in Hochma. Hence, the Netzah is considered not having
He’arat GAR de Hochma, and Sefirat Hod extends from Behinat
Matei in Hochma. For this reason the Hod is considered to be shining
He’arat Hochma in it.
Thus, the whole difference between Netzah and Hod is in the He’arat
Hochma, which is absent in Netzah, and present in Hod. This
difference is therefore possible when there is He’arat Hochma in the
Partzuf in general. Yet, when there is only He’arat Achoraim de Ima
in the He’arat Partzuf in general, then there is no longer any

--- PAGE 527 ---
difference between Netzah and Hod, since there is no He’arat
Hochma in Hod too, just like in Netzah.
Hence, at that time they are considered one Sefira, and for this reason
the Sefirot Netzah and Hod de Nekudim that have only from Behina
Bet de YESHSUT, and are also clothed in the Achoraim that fell form
the Upper AVI, do not have He’arat Hochma, and are thus considered
one Sefira.
We might say that accordingly, the Sefirot Hesed and Gevura too
should have been regarded as one Kli. This is because its been
clarified that the only difference between Hesed and Gevura is in the
He’arat Hochma too, existing in Hesed and missing in Gevura, since
the disparity between the Hesed and Gevura and the Netzah and Hod
is great.
This is so because the force of the Achoraim de Bina begins primarily
from Bina downward in all the Partzufim, since each Behina sucks
from its corresponding Behina in the Eser Sefirot de Ohr Yashar.
These Achoraim are not incorporated in the two Sefirot Keter and
Hochma at all, only in Bina. Hence, Hesed and Gevura too, which are
Behinat Keter and Hochma de Hassadim, the force of the Achoraim
does not operate on their own Behina with respect to themselves.
The force of the Achoraim operates in its fullest measure only from
Tifferet downward, which is known to relate to Bina. Thus, Hesed is
always considered containing GAR even during the Katnut of the
Partzuf, which is not so with Gevura. Also, there is a big difference
between Hesed and Gevura, since Hesed still contains GAR with
respect to itself, whereas Gevura, which is not so with the Gevura,
being in Achoraim on the GAR from its Shoresh.
60. Now there is no distance among any of the above Orot and their
Kelim that is more than three degrees. This is because more than
three degrees are a complete distance and it cannot shine in it.
However, the rest of the Orot descended from their place as well,
except Tifferet, which remained in its place and did not descend.

--- PAGE 528 ---
You find, that undoubtedly, though we have clarified that the
descent of the other Orot from their place was for the needs of the
Kelim, to shine for them, still, being below their place, their force
was slightly weakened.
For this reason they do not have the strength to rise upwards, but
the Ohr Tifferet that stood in its place, its taste did not change, and
its power is strong. Hence when it sees that it has no Kli, it can rise
to the place it came from because it has no wish to stay bare,
disclosed without a Levush. It returns to Bina, to the place where
it first stood. If it does that, you will find that it will be very
distant from its Kli, and it will die completely.
Ohr Pnimi
60. The Ohr Tifferet that stood in its place, its taste did not change etc.
By that he explains the Hitpashtut Kli de Keter up to the Chazeh.
Also, he gave below the reason for the Hitpashtut of the Kli de Bina
up to Gevura in order to give room for the reigning of Netzah and
Hod. It is also the reason for the Hitpashtut Kli de Hesed in order to
give a place for the reigning of Yesod. Thus, all these reasons are
completely unnecessary according to the Rav’s words in several
places (Tree of Life, Gate 9, Chap 84, and in Mavo She’arim, Gate 2,
Part 2, Chap 6).
He writes there, “When Tifferet died and the Ohr began to die and
depart from the first third through the Chazeh, the general Hey
Hassadim and Gevurot descended from the two Yesodot of the two
Malchuyot of the Upper AVI. Their Achoraim completed their fall and
the Achoraim of Upper AVI were found sitting here below in this
manner, since the Achoraim of Abba sit on the right line, in the place
that was Hesed de ZA, which is the second Melech.
The Achoraim of Ima in the place where the third Melech, which is
Gevura de ZA was. It is known that AVI were as Kavim because they
were the Achoraim that fell thus far. This is the Behinat new Kli that

--- PAGE 529 ---
AVI made, which expanded thus far, and then Hesed and Gevura rose
there.
That Hitpashtut is these Behinat Achoraim itself, which fell down
through there etc. and Orot Hesed and Gevura clothed these two
Achoraim as well as Orot Netzah and Hod. However, it is all above in
the place of Hesed and Gevura, and understand that thoroughly.”
Similarly, Kli de Keter was made of Behinat Achoraim de NHY of the
Keter that were blemished and fell below.
Accordingly, the matter of the Hitpashtut Kelim de KHB to HGT is
one with the fall of the Achoraim de AVI and NHY de Keter, as the
Rav says there. Hence there is no longer a question why three Kavim
of KHB expanded and there is no matter and place for these reasons.
Moreover, these reasons contradict the Rav’s words above. This is
because according to the reasons that he wrote here about the
Hitpashtut of the Kavim, to be in order to give room for the Melachim
of NHYM, you find that Kav Bina expanded first to Kav Hochma
because Netzah and Hod reigned before the Yesod.
Hence, he says here that first Kav Bina expanded and then Hochma,
but in fact they are Behinat Achoraim that fell from AVI and Keter.
Thus, the Kav Hochma expanded prior to the Kav Bina, since the
Achoraim de Hochma fell in the death of Kli de Hesed and Achoraim
de Ima fell in the death of Kli de Gevura.
It follows that first the Kav Hochma expanded to Hesed, and then the
Kav Bina to Gevura. This is the opposite of what he wrote here, and
perhaps both rumors are from the Rav. It is truer to say that these
reasons are from Rav Chaim Vital himself and are not at all the Rav’s
words.
Besides the above, what also stems from the above reasons is that the
Kelim de Melachim of Netzah and Hod fell between the Kelim of HGT
as he will say below. This is hard to hear since NHY compared to HGT
is like VAK compared to GAR, and how would Kli de VAK fall dwell
in the middle of the Kelim de GAR, between Hesed and Gevura?

--- PAGE 530 ---
It has been thoroughly clarified in the Rav’s words in Mavo She’arim,
that at the very death of the upper third of Tifferet and the completion
of the fall of all the Achoraim de AVI, they became three new Kelim,
Hesed, Gevura, and Tifferet together. The four Orot from the four
Melachim Daat, Hesed, Gevura, and Tifferet rose there together, and
Reshimot de Daat and Tifferet clothed in the new Kli de Tifferet. Also,
the Reshimo de Hesed in the new Kli de Hesed, and also the Reshimo
de Gevura in Kli de Gevura.
61. For this reason the Maatzil Elyon wanted and extended and
magnified the Kli Keter, which did not break and extended
through the middle line. This is because the GAR were formed as
three lines to begin with, and extended through the middle line up
to the place of Tifferet, only through its middle, which is up to the
Tabur.
At that time the Ohr Tifferet rose and vanished inside that Kli of
Keter that expanded up to its place. You find that only half the
bottom Ohr Tifferet rose, since the upper half stands in its place
that has already expanded in it through the Kli Keter.
Then the Ohr Daat that descended below in Malchut de Atzilut,
seeing that it was already a new Kli in its place, here its place is
also in the middle line between the Keter and the Tifferet, and then
it too rose and ascended to its place.
At that time, since the Ohr had drawn far from its Kli, it
descended down in Malchut de Beria, though the Kli of Tifferet
remained in its place, which is in Keter de Beria, since only half its
Ohr rose, not all of it, and its Upper half remained in its place.
Ohr Pnimi
61. Only half the bottom Ohr Tifferet rose, since the upper half stands
in its place.
It means that after the Masach de Chazeh was purified and rose to its
Shoresh to AVI, the Rosh de YESHSUT came out on it through its
Hitkalelut in the Zivug de Rosh from there. Their Guf expanded from

--- PAGE 531 ---
above downward in the two thirds of Tifferet from the Chazeh
downward from their Histaklut Eynaim. Also, after the Kli de Tifferet
broke and descended to Keter de Beria, this Ohr that was in the two
bottom thirds of Tifferet rose and ascended to the new Kli de Tifferet
that was made of the Achoraim de Keter.
The upper half stands in its place.
It means that it did not descend from its degree because of the
breaking of its Kli, and this is because of what the Rav wrote above
(item 44), that Achoraim de Abba and Achoraim de Ima descended
before there was a blemish and deficit in the Yesodot de AVI.
This is because after the Achoraim de AVI have already descended and
returned Achor be Achor, the fourth Melech began to reign, being the
Upper third of Tifferet. He wrote the reason there, which is because
the Yesod is all Panim and has no Achoraim that descended from it.
It explains there in Ohr Pnimi that this entire Ohr that descended
through the Zivug Yesodot de AVI is Behinat Achor be Achor. This is
because they mated after they’d returned Achor be Achor, and He’arat
Achor be Achor is considered Behinat Panim de Abba ve Ima,
meaning from what they have from the beginning of their creation,
which are not at all harmed by the matter of the breaking of the
vessels.
Thus, the Ohr of the Upper third of Tifferet up to the Chazeh that
extends from the Zivug Yesodot de AVI has no flaw because of the
breaking of the vessels, since it extends from Zivug de Achor be
Achor. He writes here, “but the Ohr of the upper half of Tifferet that
stood in its place, its taste did not change, and its power is strong.”
We might therefore ask, why did the Kli of the Upper third of Tifferet
break, since it only had Behinat Achor be Achor, which is all Behinat
Panim? The Rav has already written that the Behinat Panim remains
only in AVI, yet in the Kelim de ZAT, the Behinat Panim broke in them
too.

--- PAGE 532 ---
However, indeed his breaking was not great, but he rather descended
from Behinat Rosh de Tifferet to Behinat VAK de Tifferet, meaning to
Behinat from the Chazeh downward. What the Rav wrote above, that
it fell to Keter de Beria, it is after the Guf de Histaklut Eynaim de
YESHSUT expanded in it, and it broke and the Ohr ascended to the
Upper half of the new Kli de Tifferet.
At that time it fell to Keter de Beria, meaning to the corresponding
Behina, since the Guf de YESHSUT that it expanded in is Behinat
Keter de YESHSUT as well. From this you can see that its breaking is
not great since all the Kelim of the Melachim descended to ZAT de
Beria and only the Tifferet fell to the Keter de Beria, which is close to
Atzilut.
Ohr Daat that descended etc. it too rose and ascended to its place.
It has already been explained above (Ohr Pnimi item 61, sub header
“Only half the bottom”), that right after the Hitpashtut of the three
Kavim de KHB to the Behinot new Kelim DHGT, all the Orot of the
four Melachim Daat and HGT rose to their place together, each in his
own Kav.
The reason for their ascent back to the Kelim of the new HGT that
emerged in their place is because of the new Zivug which is the Rosh
de YESHSUT that came out there in their place, which is Behinat
Hitpashtut Bet that returns and fills the Kelim and the Reshimot that
remained after the Histalkut of the Partzuf Elyon, as it was in the
previous Partzufim de AK.
This is because the Reshimot and the empty Kelim of the Partzuf
Elyon always travel to its Partzuf Tachton. So it is here with
YESHSUT, which fills the Kelim and the Reshimot de Guf of the
Upper AVI. However, the Kelim have already broken and fell, and it
fills only the Reshimot alone, which are the Orot DHGT that
previously fell to NHYM de Atzilut. Hence, now they returned to their
place and are filled with Ohr de YESHSUT.
Now you can also understand the reason for the double decline that
happened to the Kelim of the Melachim, those Daat and HGT. It is

--- PAGE 533 ---
that the primary sustenance of these Kelim that fell to KHBD de Beria,
is their Reshimot. Since these Reshimot were from Behinat GAR de
ZAT, which are the Orot Gufim of the Upper AVI, hence they also fell
to their corresponding Behina, to GAR de Beria, meaning in KHBD de
Beria.
On the one hand, now after their Reshimot rose to the place of the new
Kelim and were renewed in the He’arat Rosh de YESHSUT, they
gained much, since they have obtained a new Ohr under the first Ohr
of the Upper AVI that departed from them. On the other hand, they lost
much due to their becoming receivers of the Ohr de YESHSUT, in that
they have descended from Behinat GAR to Behinat ZAT.
Thus, YESHSUT with respect to AVI are only Behinot ZAT. Because of
that their Kelim that are in Beria descended from the Behinat GAR of
Beria to Behinat ZAT of Beria too, and hence fell an even greater fall
from the place of KHBD de Beria to the place of NHYM de Beria.
We might say that according to that, they should have fallen to HGT
de Beria, and not to NHYM. This is because it has already been
explained that the Aviut is considered lowness in the empty Kelim, and
the more Zach in them is more important. Hence, when HGT NHYM
fall to ZAT, they are inverted. The HGT fall to NHYM, and the purer
NHYM fall to HGT de Beria, and this is simple.
You should know that this Ohr Daat that rose to its place is only the
Reshimot de Hassadim of the Daat, but the Reshimo de Gevurot still
remained there in Malchut, and rose only after the breaking of the
vessels of the Melachim de NHYM.
62. You might say, that we have said above that there must be a
distance of only three Sefirot between the Kelim and its Ohr. Thus,
how did the Kli of Daat descend to Malchut de Beria? The answer
is that certainly, where it is possible, it is possible.
In the beginning, one enjoyed and the other was not in deficit.
This is because in the beginning the Kli enjoyed its Ohr while Daat
was below, and the Ohr was also not in deficit. Even if it rises to its

--- PAGE 534 ---
place in the Daat of Atzilut, it hasn’t any Kli there, hence it wished
to shine in its Kli, and since it descended, it did not rise again.
Yet, when it saw that there is a Behinat Kli in its place, it is close to
its own pleasure and benefit more than to benefit to its Kli. This is
because now when it rises upward in its place, it has a Kli where it
can receive the Ohr for itself from above, from the Maatzil and
from the Keter in great proximity, and this is why it rose.
This reason will suffice to the discernment of the benefit of the
Ohr for itself. However, it is also not such a great loss to the
discernment of the demerit of its Kli when it descends below in
Malchut de Beria.
This is because when we say that there must not be a distance
between the Ohr and its Kli, but only of three Sefirot, it is the
measure of three Sefirot de Atzilut, whose measure is great. Yet, in
Beria, the measure of the entire Yod Sefirot de Beria is not even as
one Sefira of Atzilut. Thus, it is as if she stands at the Rosh of Beria
because all the Yod Sefirot de Beria are considered one Sefira.
Ohr Pnimi
62. From the Maatzil and from the Keter in great proximity.
It is because there it receives from the new Rosh de YESHSUT, which
is Keter, because every Rosh is Behinat Keter. Also, afterwards when
his Reshimot de Gevurot ascend in him, a new Zivug is made on
himself and he receives Ohr from the Maatzil. He writes, “where it
can receive the Ohr from the Maatzil and from the Keter in great
proximity,” and this is why he ascended.
63. You might say, but there is a difference of seven Sefirot de Atzilut
between the Kli de Daat and her Ohr, as he stands up in Daat de
Atzilut? We must understand that even in the Sefirot de Atzilut
themselves there is not so much of a loss, except when there is a
measure of three Sefirot between the Ohr and the Kli without any
Ohr at all, not it, and not any other.

--- PAGE 535 ---
Yet, here, though her Ohr itself rose up, there are still other Orot
standing at the end of Atzilut, close to Beria, and she can receive
the He’arah from them. She can also receive He’arah from her
own Ohr through these Orot that are close to her.
Remember this rule in all the other Sefirot since there are never
more than three empty Sefirot de Atzilut between the Kli and the
Ohr, and we will never have to return and say this matter in each
of them.
64. When Ohr Daat rose to its place above, it magnified the Kli of
Keter and extended through opposite the place of Sium of the
entire Tifferet. At that time the bottom half of the Ohr Tifferet that
rose up now returned in its real place as in the beginning.
The reason for the magnification of Kli Keter was because of the
Ohr Daat that clothed it and magnified it. It is also because the
Daat contains the entire VAK and it is Neshama to them. Hence,
because it rose, it gave force in its Kli and magnified it in order to
benefit the Ohr Tifferet that descended and would be in its proper
place.
Ohr Pnimi
64. It magnified the Kli of Keter and extended through opposite the
place of Sium of the entire Tifferet.
It means that afterwards, when it rose to it with the Reshimot de
Gevurot of the Daat, as the Rav says below, a Zivug was made anew
on the Hassadim and Gevurot of the Daat, and then the Kelim from
the Chazeh downward grew.
65. After that Netzah Hod reigned. They had to come and reign in
their place, in their proper Kli, but they did not find their place
vacant since the Ohr Gevura descended there. For this reason Bina
had to expand through her Kav, which is the left side, to the place
that is fitting to later be the real place of Gevura, after the Tikun,
since now they were all one atop the other.

--- PAGE 536 ---
Then, when Ohr Gevura saw that it was already Behinat Kli in her
place, she rose in her place and when her Kli departed from it, he
too departed and descended down to Yesod de Beria. At that time
Netzah Hod came down in their real place and reigned there in
their Kli, and broke.
Then their Ohr rises up to Gevura, because Hod rose there, since it
too is a left line, and then Netzah rose with him there. This is
because Netzah Hod are two parts of the body, and their Kli
descended in Netzah Hod de Beria.
Ohr Pnimi
65. Netzah Hod reigned. They had to come and reign etc. descended in
Netzah Hod de Beria.
It has already been explained above (Ohr Pnimi item 60) that
according to the reasoning here about the matter of the Hitpashtut of
Gimel Kavim de KHB to HGT, that it is because the Melachim of
NHYM could not come out of their place. This is because they were
not vacant, since the Orot de DHGT were there.
Thus you find that Kav ha Bina expanded at the time of the emergence
of the Melachim de NH. Since the Ohr Gevura rose and drew far from
the Kli, the Kli of Gevura fell to Yesod de Beria. After that Netzah and
Hod reigned and when they broke, NH descended to NH de Beria.
At the time of the emergence of Melech ha Yesod, which did not find
its place vacant, the Kav of Hochma had to expand. The Ohr Hesed
rose there from the place of Sefirat Yesod to the Kli de Hesed that was
made of the Hitpashtut of Hochma.
Also, the Kli de Hesed fell to the place of Tifferet de Beria through the
drifting of the Ohr Hesed from the Kli, and now you find that the Kli
de Daat is in Malchut of the Beria, and the Kli Gevura atop it. The Kli
de Netzah and Hod atop it, and atop that, the Kli de Hesed.
Yet, it is very puzzling, that the Kli de NH, which is from the last
Melachim whose breaking is not so great, would fall further below the
Kli de Hesed, which is from the first Melachim, whose breaking is

--- PAGE 537 ---
great indeed, which were disclosed without any Hitlabshut from the
Achoraim de Ima, as the Rav says above.
We have already elaborated our speech about that above (Ohr Pnimi
item 60) and from the Rav’s words it has been explained there that in
most places, the Hitpashtut of the Gimel Kavim KHB, is the matter of
the fall of the Achoraim de AVI itself. Also, this whole Hitpashtut
ended along with the end of the fall of the Achoraim de AVI, meaning
in the Upper third of Tifferet.
After YESHSUT came out and clothed the Achoraim de AVI, there
immediately rose all the Orot de HGT to the new Kelim de Hitpashtut
KHB. At that time all three Kelim Daat, Hesed, Gevura, came down
together to the place of NHYM de Beria, Daat in Malchut, Hesed in
Yesod, and Gevura in NH. In other words, the more Av it is, the lower
it is.
All this was before the exit of the last Melachim to Kelim de NHYM de
Atzilut. Thus, when the Melachim of NHYM came to reign, their place
was already vacant, hence they too fell to Beria, according to the order
that the more Av one is, the lower it falls. For this reason NH fell in
Tifferet de Beria, Kli de Yesod in Gevura de Beria and Kli Malchut in
Hesed de Beria.
Now you find the seven Melachim in ZAT of Beria according to the
right order that the more Zach is above since its breaking is not so
great, and the more Av is below because its breaking is greater. Thus,
the Kli Malchut is in Hesed de Beria, the Kli Yesod is in Gevura de
Beria, Kli NH is in Tifferet de Beria, and Kli Gevura in Netzah and
Hod de Beria. Also, the Kli Daat is in Malchut de Beria.
The exception is the Kli de Tifferet, which did not descend to ZAT de
Beria, but only to Keter de Beria for the reason explained above (Ohr
Pnimi item 61, sub header “The upper half”).
66. Afterwards came out the Ohr Yesod. Yet, Ohr Hesed was in its
place, and so Kli Hochma had to expand through the right line up
to the fitting place to be the real Hesed after the Tikun.

--- PAGE 538 ---
Then Ohr Hesed rose there and was integrated in the general
Hochma, and the Kli of Hesed descended down to Tifferet de Beria.
At that time the Yesod came out and entered in its Kli, and reigned
in its place and broke.
The Ohr rose through the middle line and rose up to the place of
Daat Elyon and its Kli descended in Gevura of the Beria.
Afterwards we will explain why the Ohr Yesod rose above Tifferet,
up to Daat.
67. Afterwards the Ohr Malchut came out to reign in her Kli. She
reigned there and broke, and then her Ohr rose in Daat through
the middle line too, and her Kli descended in Hesed of Beria. Now
Kli Tifferet is in the place of Keter de Beria, and Kli Malchut is in
the place of Hesed de Beria.
It follows that the place between Kli to Kli de Beria is only three
degrees, which are HBD. In Atzilut, however, there is no vacant
place, but only two degrees, which are the place of Yesod and
Malchut.
68. Now we should provide the reason that both Ohr Yesod and
Malchut rose up to Daat, above Tifferet. The reason is etc. that
since the conduct of Yesod is to rise to the Daat, hence now Ohr
Yesod rose to the Daat, above Tifferet. All the more so in order to
connect all the VAK together and bring them He’arah from there.
69. Now we shall explain the reasoning of Malchut, why she too rose
up to Daat above Tifferet. The thing is that Malchut is called “a
crown to her husband.” She ascends above Tifferet, and especially
now that she had a Reshimo from the Daat.
This is because when Ohr Daat descended to the place of Malchut
de Atzilut, when its Kli broke, it left its Reshimo there. When
Malchut reigned in her place, she took this Reshimo and rose up to
the place of Daat itself.
There is yet another reason: she connects all the VAK from below
upward by her ascent there, thus this connection is corrected

--- PAGE 539 ---
more. Since both Netzah and Hod were on the left line in the place
of Gevura, and now the Netzah has separated from the Hod, it
went and rose with the Hesed in the right line in it.
70. Now we shall explain this matter in greater detail: This Reshimo
that Daat left in Malchut’s place is certainly the Behinat Malchut
in Daat, on the part of Gevurot, and understand that well.
Malchut rose up to Daat and the above Reshimo rose along with
her, which is the Behinat Gevura. This Reshimo, which is the
Malchut of Gevurot in Daat connected the Atara de Gevura de
Nukva with the Hassadim in Daat, Atara de Dechura.
At that time the Daat expanded through this connection and
illuminated in VAK. The Reshimo, which is in Gevura, illuminated
in the left line, and left the Hod there in its place. Also, that Daat
itself, Atara de Hesed, illuminated in the right line and extended
the Netzah there, and thus the Atzilut was corrected.
Ohr Pnimi
70. Malchut rose up to Daat and the above Reshimo rose along with
her.
The matter of the ascent of Malchut and the Reshimo in Zivug Hey
Hassadim and Hey Gevurot in the Daat requires elaborate
explanation, and will be interpreted in its place. Here I will present it
briefly.
You know that the whole matter of these four Melachim that expanded
from both AVI and from YESHSUT are a matter of the Hizdakchut of
the Masach and the Histalkut of the Orot as has been explained in the
previous Partzufim de AK.
When the Masach de AVI purified until it equalized with the Shoresh,
which is the Peh de AVI, the Masach and the Reshimot in it returned in
the form of Hitkalelut of the Zivug de AVI. Also, the Masach retuned
and thickened in Aviut de Behina Bet, since the last Behina was lost,
and the Komat YESHSUT came out on it.

--- PAGE 540 ---
Thus, Masach de YESHSUT too was purified from degree to degree
until it reached Komat Malchut, and then the seventh Melech emerged,
which is Malchut. After this Melech broke, the Masach is found to
have purified from the Aviut Malchut too, and then it is equalized with
its Behinat Shoresh, which is the Peh de YESHSUT.
At that time it made a new Zivug there in Aviut de Behina Aleph, since
the last Behina is lost, and for that reason the Komat Daat, being
Komat ZA, came out on it. Not a whole Partzuf Rosh and Guf
expanded from this Zivug, since it emerged only in Hey Hassadim and
Hey Gevurot, two Itrin (Aramaic: Ketarim).
For this reason it came out only in Behinat from below upward, in
Behinat Achor be Achor, and hence tied the VAK together, meaning
the Behinat Gufim that came out in YESHSUT, which are from the
Chazeh down since there is its Behinat Hitpashtut from the Peh of
YESHSUT downward.
He writes, “the Daat expanded through this connection and
illuminated in VAK,” meaning it expanded from the Chazeh down
which is the place of the Peh de YESHSUT, meaning in the place of
NHY, as there is its place, meaning below the Rosh de YESHSUT.
Since it came out in the form of Achor be Achor, hence, there was a
Tikun Kavim in it.
He writes, “The Reshimo, which is in Gevura, illuminated in the left
line, and left the Hod there in its place etc. and extended the Netzah
there.” This is because the Rosh de Tachton clothes and fills the Kelim
and the Reshimot de Elyon, and thus illuminated in the Reshimot de
Melachim of Netzah and Hod. It administered Tikun Kavim in them
and in that the Tikun Kavim expanded from the Chazeh down too, and
magnified the Kelim to the place of Netzah and Hod.
Thus, the Tikun Kavim was completed in all the ZAT from the Behina
of the Reshimot in them, since HGT were corrected in the Rosh de
YESHSUT and NH were corrected in the Rosh of the Daat, meaning in
Behinat from below upward.

--- PAGE 541 ---
71. *Now see and understand how the Atzilut was not corrected at one
time, but they their correction came slowly, one-by-one, and every
time a little more Tikun was added in it. This is so because in the
beginning, a Behinat Kli was not made at all, and it is known that
any Tikun is only the Ohr clothing in the Kli so that the Tachtonim
might receive the Ohr Elyon.
72. The making of the Kli began only in Olam ha Akudim, though only
one Kli was made for all of its Eser Sefirot. Afterwards, in Olam ha
Nekudim, before they broke, some Tikun was added in them, and
this is because ten Kelim were added to the Yod Sefirot in it.
There is also a second Tikun: The GAR came out and were
corrected through Kavim, which is not so in ZAT that emerged one
atop the other and were not connected. Afterwards, when the
Nekudim broke, another Tikun was added in them, which is that
the Orot of ZAT too clothed through the Kavim of KHB.
73. After that when the Maatzil wanted to correct them, he raised the
Kelim in Atzilut too, in an order of three Kavim. Then when they
were made in Behinat Kavim, came the Ibur Aleph of ZON, and a
second Tikun was added, as the Orot came inside the Kelim.
However, it is still only in Behinat Gimel Kavim, which we call
Gimel contained in Gimel. Then they expanded in the form of VAK
during the Yenika, and after that, at the time of the Mochin and all
Yod Kelim were completed, there was another change.
This is because in the beginning, before there was any Ibur, there
wasn’t even the first Ibur de ZON, but only a restricted Ohr in the
Kli. Afterwards the Kli expanded in the form of a complete Partzuf
in order to diminish the Ohr, since this is the primary intention of
the Tikun.
Ohr Pnimi
73. There was another change.
Here he tells us that two principal Tikkunim were necessary to
complete the Kelim in a manner that the Tachtonim can receive the

--- PAGE 542 ---
Ohr Elyon. The first is the Tikun of the Gimel Kavim; the second is the
enlargement of the Kelim in the form of a Partzuf.
Now, in the Gufim of GAS de AK, called Akudim, there was only one
Kli and one Kav. Afterwards, when the MA and BON de AK, called
Akudim, or BON de AK, came out, ten Kelim emerged, as well as
Tikun Kavim in GAR de Nekudim. After HGT broke, and the Rosh de
YESHSUT came out, there was a Tikun Kavim in Orot de HGT.
When Netzah Hod Yesod Malchut broke and the Zivug de Hey
Hassadim and Hey Gevurot in Daat came out, there was a Tikun
Kavim in the Orot NHY de Nekudim as well, and the matter of the Ibur
Yenika Mochin will be clarified in its place.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 543 ---
H P
ISTAKLUT NIMIT
The matter of the seven Melachim explained in this part in the Rav’s
words is the foundation of the entire wisdom. This is because all four
Olamot ABYA extend from them, and the whole matter of the
Tikkunim, the scrutinies and the concatenation of all the degrees come
only to complement and to correct them. Hence, they require extra
care to thoroughly understand the origin of their emanation and the
reason for their breaking and fall to BYA.
1. First we must discern and distinguish between these seven Melachim
and AVI de Nekudim, because although they extend from AVI, they are
still very far from each other. This is because they did not extend and
concatenate directly from AVI through cause and consequence, but
reached them through another Partzuf, as the Rav says above (Item
31), that Yesod de AK administered Vav ו and Nekuda to AVI to elicit
and beget the ZAT. Thus, AK administered the seven Melachim to AVI.
We must understand that matter. How is Partzuf ZAT de Nekudim
different from all the previous Partzufim, all of which extended
directly through cause and consequence from one another? Only
Partzuf ZAT does not extend from its Elyon directly, but rather three
Partzufim participated in its emanation, Yesod de AK, Abba, and Ima.
2. We should also understand why Partzuf Nekudim did not expand GAR
and ZAT at once as in all the previous Partzufim. Instead, first only
GAR expanded, which are Keter and AVI, and afterwards, through the
Zivug of Yesod de AK that the Shuruk administered them, the ZAT de
Nekudim emerged.
The reason for it is as has been explained above (Ohr Pnimi item 5
par. “You see” and par. “We might ask”) that these AVI are but Behinat
ZON de Rosh, which are merely Behinat HP. The reason they are

--- PAGE 544 ---
considered Behinat Rosh is only because of the He’arat Ohr Awzen
that they received by their Hitkalelut in the Keter of Nekudim.
As it is written (Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 23, par. “Thus, all the Orot”),
this He’arah corrected them in Behinat Achor be Achor. The
Achoraim de Bina, called Awzen, sustain them in Behinat GAR, and
they are not blemished because of the Masach de Hey Tata’a above
them, preventing He’arat Panim de Hochma from them.
This is because they crave only Hassadim through the Achoraim de
Bina, in the form of “because He delighteth in mercy” and they reject
Hochma. Hence, the Masach de Hey Tata’a does not diminish them at
all, as they have no wish for Hochma in any case (Ohr Pnimi item 23,
par. “It has been explained”).
However, that Tikun de Achoraim is sufficient only to complement
AVI themselves, but it is not enough for them to be able to illuminate
and elicit the ZON, which are the ZAT.
This is so because the force of the Achoraim of Bina is only in her
GAR, and they are not in her ZAT. This is because when she came to
emanate and expand in her ZAT, she must stop her Achoraim on Abba,
and returns Panim be Panim with him in order to extend He’arat
Hochma from him for her ZAT (Ohr Pnimi item 24).
From this you know that any Partzuf that is corrected in the Achoraim
of Bina is found to be without NHY. This is because GAR de
Hassadim, which are HGT, can be well corrected in the Achoraim de
Ima. The NHY, however, cannot even exit and expand from her
outwardly even in Sefirat Bina except through Panim be Panim with
Hochma.
For this reason they cannot appear in this Partzuf that is corrected in
her Achoraim, and it is considered in it that its NHY are integrated in
its HGT, in the form of, “their hinder parts were inward.” The NHY,
which are Behinat Achoraim, are in Pnimiut HGT, and their Panim are
disclosed outwardly, and only their Panim, which are HGT, are
disclosed outwardly (Ohr Pnimi item 29, par. “Now we have
thoroughly”).

--- PAGE 545 ---
That thoroughly explains that AVI de Nekudim that were corrected in
Tikun Achor be Achor could not have educed the ZON, but only after
they obtain Behinat Panim be Panim, since Hitpashtut ZON does not
come out from Behinat Achoraim at all. Examine all the places I have
mentioned above well for it is impossible to elaborate twice.
3. The Rav has already explained above (item 25) that AVI do not return
Panim be Panim but through three degrees: Achor be Achor, Panim be
Achor, and then Panim be Panim. Examine there in Ohr Pnimi where
the reason for the matters is thoroughly explained.
It explains there (Ohr Pnimi item 23, sub header, “Above it, it is
Panim”) that this degree de Panim be Achor comes to them through
Zivug de AB SAG that lowers the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim, at
which time AVI return to the Rosh and obtain their GAR. We must still
understand who causes AB SAG to mate in order to lower the Hey
Tata’a.
The Rav has already explained above (Part 6, item 6) that “all the
inner Behinot SAG, concealed in the inner MA and BON rose, and the
inner MA and BON rose along with them. Thus these MA and BON are
their MAN, to the Taamim de SAG themselves, which are not clothed
inside MA and BON.”
Interpretation: Nekudot de SAG expanded below Tabur de AK ha
Pnimi which is the place of the inner MA and BON, being ZON de AK
ha Pnimi. Thus you find that after the Hizdakchut of the Masach and
its ascent to Peh de Rosh SAG, it is integrated with these inner MA and
BON.
For this reason they became MAN to the inner AVI de Rosh SAG,
called AB SAG de AK. At that time these AB and SAG mated and the
AB lowered the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim of SAG, and the AHP de
SAG returned to the Rosh. Hence, all the AHP that went outside the
degree have now returned to their degree as in the beginning.
It explains there in Ohr Pnimi that the Behinot SAG that rose from the
MAN BON, became MAN too, though there were two Zivugim there:
One for the Katnut de Nekudim from which AVI emerged in the form

--- PAGE 546 ---
of Achor be Achor, and a second for the purpose of Gadlut de
Nekudim from which AVI obtained their GAR (Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item
14, par. “Now we have thoroughly clarified”).
You should know that the Katnut de Nekudim, which are in Behinat
Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim and YHV in the AHP, emerged from the
Reshimot de SAG that were mixed in the MA and BON. Also, the
Zivug de AB SAG that lowered the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim once
more and reconnected the AHP to the Rosh as in the beginning,
emerged from the Reshimot of the inner MA and BON themselves.
4. The reason for MA and BON becoming the cause for Upper AB and
SAG to mate to lower the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim is that the
Partzuf that emerged from the Nikvey Eynaim would not have
expanded to shine for these MA and BON, being NHY de AK.
This is because of the Tikun of the Achoraim de Ima that lies there.
This Tikun detains the Hitpashtut NHY since they must be
incorporated in HGT in the form of, “their hinder parts were inward.”
Hence, once the Partzuf de Nikvey Eynaim came out on the Masach
that consists of the Reshimot de Nekudot de SAG and Hey Tata’a, it
did not suffice for the NHY de AK, and the Reshimot de NHY de AK
were made into MAN in the Rosh SAG, which is the Behinat general
Bina.
She has a correlation to dispense He’arat Hochma to ZON on the part
of Bina de Ohr Yashar, and therefore SAG stopped its Achoraim and
mated with AB Panim be Panim. Also, the Hey Tata’a was lowered
from the Eynaim de Rosh SAG through this Zivug since He’arat AB
does it, as there is no Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim de Rosh AB.
At that time this new Ohr expanded from above downward too and
fissured the Parsa. This means that it annulled the new Gevul de
Tzimtzum Bet that took the AHP out of all the degrees. This is because
this new Ohr that comes from AB cancels and lowers the Hey Tata’a
to its place to Malchut de Rosh as well as to Malchut of all the
degrees. The AHP of each return to their degree as in the beginning

--- PAGE 547 ---
and this new Ohr expanded below the Tabur de AK, meaning to NHY
de AK, called MA and BON de AK.
This new Ohr expanded and came out through the Tabur to Keter de
Nekudim, as the Rav says above (Part 6, item 27). It cancelled the
Gevul and the cessation between Keter and AVI de Nekudim that was
made there because of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim de Keter since it
lowered her from Eynaim to her place in the Peh. Thus, AVI returned
to the Rosh since now the Masach de Hey Tata’a is below them, hence
they returned to their GAR degree as in the beginning.
Besides this exit through the Tabur, this new Ohr exited through Yesod
de AK as well, administering them the Shuruk, which is the Vav ו and
Nekuda. Abba took the Nekuda and Ima took the ו to elicit and beget
the VAK de ZA, as the Rav says above (Part 6 item 31).
5. Know that the two He’arot that we’ve said to have received GAR de
Nekudim from the new Ohr that fissured the Parsa, made two
situations in AVI. This is because the first He’arah that Keter received
through the Tabur lowered the Hey Tata’a from Keter to Peh de AVI,
and then AVI returned to Behinat Rosh, like the Keter. This is so
because the Masach is already below them, and this is considered that
NHY de Keter clothed in them and AVI obtained the Ohr Panim.
Yet, it still did not help Ima since although she could now return her
Panim to Abba and receive the Ohr Hochma because the Gevul that
was made by the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim has now been revoked.
Yet, she still does not have a reason that would stop the Achoraim that
she has from her Shoresh in the Ohr Yashar. It is so because she
always craves Hassadim, “because He delighteth in mercy,” and she
rejects Hochma.
You find that only Abba enjoys the return to the Rosh since he
receives his GAR and Panim. Ima, however, still keeps her Achoraim
in the form of, “because He delighteth in mercy.”
For this reason, AVI have now come to a state of Panim be Achor,
meaning the Panim of Abba in the Achoraim of Ima. This is because
Abba has Behinat Panim, and Ima still keeps her Achoraim on Abba.

--- PAGE 548 ---
Thus, this He’arah that the Keter received to lower the Hey Tata’a
from the Eynaim created only a state of Panim be Achor in AVI.
The second He’arah through the Yesod de AK, which AVI de Nekudim
received, meaning the Vav ו and Nekuda, brought AVI to a state of
Panim be Panim. This is because that Shuruk that illuminated their
Yesod is Behinat ZON. The ו is Behinat VAK, HGT NHY de ZA, and
the Nekuda is Behinat Malchut, and they have become MAN in AVI
(Part 6 item 31).
It caused Ima to stop her Achoraim and return her Panim to Abba so
as to mate with him Panim be Panim and extend He’arat Hochma for
ZON that rose to her for MAN. Thus we have explained that through
the He’arat new Ohr through the Tabur to the Keter, AVI received the
new state of Panim be Achor.
Also, AVI received the state of Panim be Panim through the He’arah
of this new Ohr through the Yesod to AVI, as well as the rudimentary
Orot de ZON in the form of MAN, and educed and procreated them to
their place through their Zivug of Panim be Panim.
We might ask, “Since these NHY de AK ha Pnimi could not receive
from Taamim de SAG before Tzimtzum Bet (Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 1,
sub header “Its SAG”), since AB lacks the Masach de Behina Dalet,
how could they receive the new Ohr of Zivug AB SAG here?”
Yet, this is not at all a question since it is different here: The Reshimot
de NHY de AK themselves rose to MAN and integrated in the Zivug de
AB SAG. Hence they can now receive from AB. Yet, in fact, it is not
considered reception of the Kelim de NHY de AK, since they did not
extend this new Ohr for themselves, but to procreate ZAT de Nekudim,
like the drop that is extended from the father’s brain. Concerning the
NHY de AK themselves, their reception is considered a mere “in
passing”.
6. Now we have clarified our above question in item 2, why did Partzuf
Nekudim not expand GAR and ZAT simultaneously as did all the
previous Partzufim. This is so because there is a necessary distance of
three situations here. The GAR de Nekudim emerged by the Zivug in

--- PAGE 549 ---
the Nikvey Eynaim, and were therefore forced to be in a state of Achor
be Achor. In that state, even AVI themselves are considered devoid of
NHY, as in item 2, much less elicit the ZAT.
However, when they later rose to AB SAG through MAN de NHY de
AK and begotten the new Ohr that fissured the Parsa, Keter received
that Ohr first through the Tabur, and lowered the Hey Tata’a from the
Eynaim, bringing AVI to a state of Panim be Achor. After that AVI
received that Ohr through Yesod de AK, and then obtained the seven
Orot that belong to the seven lower Sefirot, which are ZON, and then
came to a state of Panim be Panim and could beget the seven lower
Sefirot de Nekudim.
The matter of the difference between ZAT de Nekudim and the ZAT of
the previous Partzufim has also been thoroughly clarified, that they
did not extend directly from their GAR, which we have discerned in
item one. It has been explained that AVI have nothing of Behinat ZON
from the essence of their creation.
This is because besides the fact that they themselves have no NHY,
they are also only from Behinat First Hey, without any Hey Tata’a
(see Part 6, Histaklut Pnimit item 9). The Hey Tata’a remained in the
Eynaim in Keter, and nothing extended from her to AVI de Nekudim,
hence it is impossible that ZAT de Nekudim would extend from AVI
directly, but only through AK ha Pnimi, whose Kelim are from Behina
Dalet, whose Koma is up to Keter.
Thus, it was impossible that ZAT de Nekudim would emerge but only
after NHY de AK ha Pnimi themselves would rise to MAN to AB SAG.
Thus they would extend a new Ohr in the form of Shuruk, which
means Vav ו and Nekuda, meaning the fundamental Orot of the ZON.
AK ha Pnimi dispensed them to MAN to AVI, at which time they
mated on them and procreated them to their place.
We might ask, “Accordingly, why are the Partzufim de AVI even
necessary? They have a connection to the Behina Dalet that is
incorporated in ZON, and they should have emerged directly from AK
ha Pnimi?”

--- PAGE 550 ---
However, according to the gradations, this is impossible. The Ne’etzal
from AK ha Pnimi is Partzuf AB, whose Koma is up to Hochma, and
not Partzuf ZAT, which are Koma de Behina Aleph, lacking GAR from
the essence of their creation.
Hence, ZON are compelled to come out through AVI, meaning in the
concatenation of the degree up to Masach de Behina Aleph (as it is
written in Part 6, Histaklut Pnimit item 5, par. “We have yet to
explain”). It follows that it needs them both, since the Atzmut de ZA
that must be incorporated in the Hey Tata’a comes out only through
NHY de AK ha Pnimi, and its emanation to come out to its place is
only possible through the Partzufim of AVI.
7. Now you will understand what our sages wrote (Kidushin p. 30), that
three partners are in a person: the Creator, his father, and his mother.
The father sows the white in him, the mother sows the red in him, and
the Creator breathes his soul in him. This partnership extends from the
upper degrees, because it is explained that in the first ZON in the
Olamot there were also three partners: AK ha Pnimi, and AVI de
Nekudim. The white in it, meaning the Hassadim, are from Abba, the
red in it, meaning the Gevurot, are from Ima, but the Etzem of its
Neshama is from AK ha Pnimi.
The same thing applies in ZA de Atzilut, where three participate in its
creation, AA and Abba and Ima. This is because AA in Atzilut
corresponds to AK ha Pnimi here, and there too the gist of its Atzmut
and Shoresh come from AA, and Hassadim and Gevurot come from
AVI.
8. Thus, the matter of the two Zivugim made for the Nekudim on the two
kinds of Reshimot that the Masach that rose to Rosh SAG consisted of,
has been thoroughly explained. The first Zivug was made on the
Reshimot of the Nekudot de SAG, mingled with the Hey Tata’a.
This Zivug was made in Behinat Nikvey Eynaim, meaning in Behina
Aleph in the Rosh, in the form of Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim. By this
the AHP came out of all the degrees and this exit induced three
Roshim in the Nekudim. Bina and ZON of Eser Sefirot de Sium de AK

--- PAGE 551 ---
also came outside of the entire Atzilut, and have become the Separated
BYA.
AVI de Nekudim, being the third Rosh, were erected in Achor be
Achor, and a second Zivug was made on the Reshimot de NHY de AK
ha Pnimi, meaning it became MAN for Zivug AB SAG de Rosh SAG.
Thus the Hey Tata’a was lowered from the Eynaim to the Peh as in the
beginning, and the Ohr that came out of this Zivug fissured the Parsa.
In other words, it cancelled the Gevul and the Masach that separates
the Eynaim from the AHP.
It retuned the AHP to their preliminary degree and illuminated to the
Nekudim in two: One – through the Tabur to the Keter de Nekudim. It
lowered the Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey Eynaim de Keter to the Peh of
the whole Rosh below AVI too. By that AVI returned to the Rosh and
obtained their GAR. The second He’arah through Yesod de AK to AVI,
which is the Behinat ו and Nekuda, meaning the Shorashim of ZON.
They have become MAN in them that returned them Panim be Panim,
and they mated and extended He’arat Hochma to ZON first, by their
Hitkalelut de ZON in Zivug AVI themselves. In that state, these ZON
are considered Behinat Daat of AVI, and then they expanded from
Malchut of AVI downward to Behinat Guf, clothing the Kli of Melech
ha Daat. The Ohr that expanded in this Melech is considered the Ohr
Yechida de ZA.
9. You already know that the first He’arah of the new Ohr that fissured
the Parsa that illuminated through the Tabur to Keter de Nekudim still
did not return Panim be Panim to AVI, but only Panim be Achor. This
is because even after Ima returned to the Rosh, she still did not stop
her Achoraim except by a reason that compels her to stop.
For this reason she did not return her Panim to Abba, but only after
she received the MAN de ו and Nekuda from Yesod de AK. These
MAN, which are Behinot ZON that she has connection with from the
part of Ohr Yashar to dispense He’arat Hochma in, awaken her to stop
the Achoraim and return Panim be Panim to Abba.

--- PAGE 552 ---
Thus, these two situations became the reason that ZON would not
receive from Zivug Panim be Panim de AVI, but only Hassadim and
Gevurot and only in He’arat Hochma. This is so because even now,
after she returned Panim be Panim with Abba, she receives from him
only that measure of He’arat Hochma that Bina de Ohr Yashar
administers to ZON de Ohr Yashar.
This is so because her entire return Panim be Panim was only for ZON
that she is connected with from the perspective of the Ohr Yashar, and
not at all for herself. For this reason she administers them in this
measure of ZON de Ohr Yashar. Also, it is known that ZON de Ohr
Yashar are themselves merely Hassadim in He’arat Hochma (Part 1,
Table of Topics, item 69).
For this reason we must greatly consider the measure of the Koma,
whether it is He’arat Hochma from Komat Keter or He’arat Hochma
from Komat Hochma etc. since the Hochma lessens and descends
from Koma to Koma. Also, you should know that the measure of the
Koma is attributed to the first situation, meaning to the new Ohr that
shines through the Tabur to Keter de Nekudim that lowered the Hey
Tata’a above AVI, below AVI to the Peh.
Although he still returned only the Panim be Achor to AVI, yet the
measure of the Koma depends on lowering the Hey Tata’a. This is
because in the lowering of the Hey Tata’a to the Peh, when Behina
Dalet is found in its place in Malchut de Rosh, Komat Keter emerges
on her.
However, if she comes only to Behina Gimel de Rosh, called Hotem,
Komat Hochma emerges on her, and if to Awzen, Komat Bina emerges
on her etc. Still, the Mochin de ZA, meaning the measure of He’arat
Hochma that ZA receives, come only in the second state, when AVI
come into a state of Panim be Panim.
This is because at that time Bina dispenses the Mochin, meaning
He’arat Hochma to ZON. Thus, the measure of the Koma depends on
the first situation according to the place that the Hey Tata’a came

--- PAGE 553 ---
down to, and Mochin de ZON depend on the second situation, as then
Ima receives He’arat Hochma for them.
10. Now you shall clearly see the quality of the Orot NRNHY de Haya
that the four Melachim received, Daat, Hesed, Gevura, and the upper
third of Tifferet. This is because the whole change in the Orot and their
lessening came only by the changes that were made in the first state,
meaning in the descent of the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim.
This is because when she came to the Peh, the Koma de Ohr Yechida
came out to Melech ha Daat, and when she rose to Hotem, the Komat
Ohr Haya came out to Melech ha Hesed. When she rose to Awzen, the
Komat Ohr Neshama emerged to Melech ha Gevura, and when she
rose to the Eynaim, to the place where she was in the beginning,
Komat Ohr de Ruach Nefesh came out to the upper third of Melech ha
Tifferet.
However, no change was made in the second state, meaning in the
state of Panim be Panim. Instead, when the Komat Yechida was in the
Partzuf, and the Hey Tata’a was in the Peh, Ima received He’arat
Hochma from Komat Yechida in the same measure that ZON de Ohr
Yashar de Keter receive from Bina de Keter. This is also the measure
de Mochin de Yechida de ZA.
This is so because every Sefira consists of Eser Sefirot, even the
Sefirot de Ohr Yashar. When the Hey Tata’a was in Hotem, Ima
received He’arat Hochma from Komat Haya, and this is the measure
de Mochin de Haya de ZA.
Also, when Hey Tata’a was in the Awzen, Ima received He’arat
Hochma from the Komat Neshama to the extent that ZON de Ohr
Yashar de Bina receive from Bina de Bina, and this is the measure of
the Mochin de Neshama de ZA. When Hey Tata’a returned to the
Eynaim once more, the second situation changes as well, and she
returned Achor be Achor with Abba. This is because she no longer
receives any He’arat Hochma from Abba, only Behinat Ruach Nefesh,
and she is completely devoid of He’arat GAR, but only in Behinat
Achor be Achor.

--- PAGE 554 ---
11. Also, afterwards it purified entirely and returned to its Shoresh to Peh
de AVI, when its Aviut de Behina Gimel returned, meaning when Hey
Tata’a descended from the Eynaim to the Hotem once more (Ohr
Pnimi item 45, sub header “The Hassadim and Gevurot continued”).
This Koma is close to Komat Haya and is generally called Neshama or
YESHSUT.
Thus, these two situations that were in AVI returned on them. Here too
the first situation changes, meaning the lowering of the Hey Tata’a
from the Eynaim. This is because when the Hey Tata’a descended to
Hotem, Tvuna receives Panim be Panim Behinat Yechida Haya de
Neshama to ZON.
At that time the Ohr descends from Malchut de YESHSUT down to the
two lower thirds of Melech ha Tifferet. When the Hey Tata’a rose to
the Awzen, Tvuna receives Behinat Neshama de Neshama to ZON, and
the Ohr expands to Melech Netzah and Hod from her Malchut.
When Hey Tata’a rose to the Eynaim, the second situation changes
too, since then YESHSUT return Achor be Achor and the Behinat
Ruach dispenses to Melech ha Yesod, and then the Behinat Nefesh to
the seventh Melech, which is the Malchut. This is so because when it
purifies to Behina Aleph, she administers Ruach, and when it purifies
to Behinat Shoresh, she administers Malchut.
12. Here you must discriminate between AVI de Katnut in a state of
Achor be Achor, when they came out of Nikvey Eynaim in the first
Zivug, and AVI de Gadlut, when they came out through Zivug de AB
SAG until they came to a state of Panim be Panim. This is so because
the differences between them are the most important elements in the
wisdom.
We must especially make the precision of the oppositeness between
them from their start to their end. In the beginning they are considered
one degree that comes in two situations. With respect to their very
creation, they are emanated in a state of Achor be Achor, and with
respect to the additional Light that they have obtained from the

--- PAGE 555 ---
He’arat Zivug de AB SAG and from MAN de Yesod de AK, they have
obtained the state of Panim be Panim.
However, they are one degree, and moreover, the second situation is
much more important than the first situation. This is because in the
first situation they were devoid of GAR de Hochma, and there were
only Behinot GAR de Achoraim Bina in them, that reject Hochma. Yet,
in the second situation they returned to the Rosh and obtained their
GAR completely.
However, in the end, the thing was overturned from end to end,
because they were separated from each other and became two degrees.
The first state became a Behinat Rosh and Behinat Panim, and the
second situation became Behinat Guf and Behinat Achoraim.
The reason for it is because of the breaking of the vessels, meaning
their Gufim that expanded in the four Melachim Daat, Hesed, Gevura,
and the Upper third of Tifferet. Yet, there is a very important
understanding in the form of the matter, worthy of special attention.
13. The thing is that the whole Partzuf de Nekudim is regarded like
Partzuf SAG de AK, because there is Behina Bet de Hitlabshut in its
Masach. Also, the whole SAG is Behinat Bina, since the Bina is the
highest Behina in it; hence all the tendencies of Bina de Ohr Yashar
control it.
It is known that Bina de Ohr Yashar is all Hassadim, and Behinat
He’arat Hochma that receives into the Hassadim is already considered
an outer Behina from it, which obtained its own name, which is ZA.
The distance between them is indeed great, as the distance between
the Shoresh and a tiny Anaf that stems from it, as Bina is the Shoresh,
and ZA is the little Anaf that stems from her.
Even though there is Behinat Achoraim on the Ohr Hochma in Bina,
these Achoraim are still not considered any diminution to her.
Moreover, they are considered the whole merit of Bina, in the form of,
“because He delighteth in mercy.”

--- PAGE 556 ---
Hence, Bina is all Behinat GAR without any lessening at all, and
because of that AVI were not at all blemished in their exit from the
Rosh due to the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim de Keter. This is because
that little He’arah that they had of the Ohr Awzen, which is Bina, by
their Hitkalelut in the Zivug de Hitlabshut of the Zachar, sufficed to
them for Behinat GAR. They are not at all blemished by the Tzimtzum
Hochma that the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim detains since they would
not have received Hochma anyhow because of the He’arat Ohr Awzen
in them.
Thus you see that the state of Achor be Achor of AVI is sufficient for
them for complete wholeness without any deficit. Hence, they do not
have such a great connection with the second state de Gadlut that
they’ve acquired from the hew Ohr that fissured the Parsa.
Had it not been for the MAN that Yesod de AK illuminated in them,
they would not have received this new Ohr whatsoever, since their
craving cleaves solely to Hassadim. Thus, the matter of the annulment
of the Zivug de Gadlut did not concern them at all, as this whole Rosh
de Gadlut was as something outside them, which they extended only
for the MAN that Yesod illuminated in them.
Moreover, even afterwards when all Eser Sefirot de Rosh de Gadlut
were cancelled, they were not cancelled entirely like ZAT, but were
rather immediately incorporated in the Achoraim de AVI of the first
situation. These Achoraim supported them in Behinat GAR and
Atzilut, and they did not fall to BYA.
Cause and Consequence
We shall now explain the order of all the operations made in the
Olamot through cause and consequence thus far, meaning how every
operation is necessarily generated in all its conditions by its original
cause.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 557 ---
T Q M
ABLE OF UESTIONS FOR THE EANING
W
OF THE ORDS
1. What is Achor be Achor?
2. What is Achor be Panim?
3. What is an Exiting Ohr?
4. What is a Thickening Ohr?
5. What are Otiot?
6. What is the Achoraim of ZA?
7. What is Achoraim of Nukva?
8. What is Achoraim de Abba?
9. What is Achoraim de AVI?
10. What is Achoraim de Ima that fell?
11. What is Complete Achoraim de ZA?
12. What is Complete Achoraim de Nukva?
13. What is a Grip?
14. What are BDK HYA?
15. What is a Cancellation?
16. What are Scrutinies?
17. What are the two lower thirds of Tifferet?
18. What are Gevurot?
19. What is Grown?
20. What is Gadlut?
21. What is Guf de Abba?

--- PAGE 558 ---
22. What is Guf de Ima?
23. What is Guf YESH?
24. What is Guf de Tvuna?
25. What the Completion of the Construction of the Achoraim?
26. What is Complete Dvekut?
27. What are Dinim?
28. What are Strong Dinim?
29. What is Habata of Panim?
30. What is Increasing half the Achoraim?
31. What are Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot?
32. What is Diminution of Ohr?
33. What Histaklut Eynaim of AVI?
34. What is Histaklut Eynaim of YESHSUT?
35. What is Raisng MAN?
36. What is Dvekut Panim be Panim?
37. What is Dvekut of the Klipot?
38. What is Hitpashtut Hey Gevurot?
39. What is Zach?
40. What is Had Samcha?
41. What is the Sustenance of the Klipot?
42. What are the Armies of Malchut?
43. What are the Parts of Nukva?
44. What is Half the Achoraim?
45. What is Half a Wall?
46. What is The Lower Half of Tifferet?
47. What is The Upper Half of Tifferet?
48. What is a Drop that Raises the Fetus?
49. What is the Yenika of the Klipot?

--- PAGE 559 ---
50. What are YESHSUT?
51. What is the Force of the Klipot?
52. What are the General Bina and Tvuna?
53. What is the General Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot?
54. What is Disclosed?
55. What is Mochin?
56. What is Death?
57. What is the Death of the Melachim?
58. What is Covered?
59. What are MAN?
60. What is Masach Bina?
61. What are Mingled in the Klipot?
62. What is the Place of the Gripping of the Klipot?
63. What is the Place of BYA?
64. What is the Place of Rosh?
65. What is a Minute Light?
66. What are Nitzotzot that Quenched?
67. What are Nitzotzot that were not Scrutinized?
68. What are Strong Nitzotzin?
69. What is a Fall?
70. What are Sigim?
71. What is a Thickening in the Achoraim?
72. What is Etz ha Daat Good and Bad?
73. What is Panim be Panim?
74. What are Parts of the Guf?
75. What is the Panim of the Zachar?
76. What is the Panim of the Nekeva?
77. What is Panim be Achor?

--- PAGE 560 ---
78. What is Waste?
79. What is Small?
80. What is Katnut?
81. What are Complete Klipot?
82. What is Klipat Noga?
83. What is Some Dvekut?
84. What is Some Breaking?
85. What is Some Tikun?
86. What is a Connection?
87. What is Rosh de AVI?
88. What is Rosh de YESHSUT?
89. What is the Breaking of the Vessels?
90. What is Upper Third of Tifferet?

--- PAGE 561 ---
1. What is Achor be Achor?
Tikun Achor be Achor extends from the He’arat Ohr Awzen, which is
Ohr Bina de Rosh, whose Achoraim is to Hochma by way of “because
He delighteth in mercy.” When the Partzufim are devoid of GAR de
Hochma, they are corrected in this Ohr de Achoraim de Bina, which
suffices for them instead of GAR. This is the meaning of “their hinder
parts were inward.”
(Item 23 and Ohr Pnimi there)
2. What is Achor be Panim?
Tikun Achor be Panim is applied in ZON, which qualifies the Kelim de
Panim de Nukva to receive the Ohr Panim. This is because the Kelim
de Panim de Nukva are in He’arat Hochma without Hassadim, as the
entire Nukva is Behinat Gevurot.
Since it is so, she too cannot tolerate He’arat Hochma since the
Hochma is not accepted without Hassadim. Hence, the Kelim de
Panim have no correction except by preceding the Zivug de Achor be
Panim.
At that time the Zachar dispenses He’arat Hassadim in those Kelim
de Panim, and they become suitable for their He’arat Hochma. You
see that although the Achor de Zachar is He’arah which is all
Hassadim, it nevertheless qualifies the Kelim de Panim de Nukva to
receive He’arat Hochma.
(Ohr Pnimi item 23, par. “Now you can understand”)
3. What is an Exiting Ohr?
As long as the Mochin de ZA are clothed in the Kelim de Ima, the
Achoraim de Ima cover and conceal the Orot de Hochma. They do not
appear from them outwardly inside ZA, but in the Middle Line de ZA
from Chazeh downward, where Yesod de Ima stops and her force of
Achoraim to hide the Hochma stops. In that state the Orot that have
He’arat Hochma in them appear outwardly from the Yesod de Ima
inside ZA.

--- PAGE 562 ---
()
4. What is a Thickening Ohr?
Even when AVI are both worthy of He’arat GAR and Ohr Panim, still
only the Zachar is completed in Behinat Panim. The Nekeva,
however, craving Hassadim in her Shoresh, by way of “because He
delighteth in mercy,” is not yet awakened to return her Panim to the
Zachar and receive Hochma, except by what compels her, which is
through MAN.
Hence, as long as she has no MAN they are in Behinat Panim be
Achor, meaning the Panim of the Zachar in the Achor de Nekeva. At
that time the Orot de Panim of the Zachar pass on to her through her
Achoraim and thicken there.
They clothe in the cover of her Ohr Achoraim and thus reach her
Kelim de Panim. For this reason these Orot de Panim are called
“Thickened Ohr”, as the cover of the Achoraim of the Nekeva greatly
diminish and lessen its value.
(Item 23 and Ohr Pnimi, sub header “Above”)
5. What are Otiot?
Otiot are always Behinat Kelim, both the Otiot of the alphabet and the
Otiot of the Holy Names, and we must always remember that.
(Item 32)
6. What is the Achoraim of ZA?
The NHY de ZA are only completed in He’arat Hochma. They are
considered its Achoraim, where the Klipot grip as long there is no
He’arat Hochma in them.
(Item 26)
7. What is Achoraim of Nukva?
The Achoraim of Nukva are NHY de Nukva, where there is the
principal grip of the Klipot as long as they lack He’arat Hochma. This
is so because it is adjacent to the Klipot as it ends the Ohr Atzilut and

--- PAGE 563 ---
from it downward begin the Klipot, by way of “Her feet go down to
death.” See the word “Grip of the Klipot”.
(Item 26)
8. What is Achoraim de Abba?
The Reshimot of the Eser Sefirot de Gadlut of all the four Komot that
were in Behinat Roshim to the four Melachim DHGT, and the Behinat
MAN that received from Yesod de AK, meaning the Nekuda that Abba
took and the Vav that Ima took, all these are considered Achoraim de
AVI that fell from Behinat Rosh de AVI and became Behinat Guf. Each
fell to the place of its Guf, and the Roshim that emerged from Behinat
Ima, and the Vav ו that Ima took from Yesod de AK are the Achoraim
de Ima.
(Item 43)
9. What is Achoraim de AVI?
These are the general Seven Melachim, which are the MAN and the
Reshimot of the Roshim of the Melachim. See item 8.
(Item 25)
10. What is Achoraim de Ima that fell?
See above answer 8.
11. What is Complete Achoraim de ZA?
When ZA is in Behinat Achor be Achor, he has only Behinat Achoraim
de Ima that shine in his HGT, meaning through the Chazeh. From
there downward Yesod de Ima stops, and for this reason the NHY
cannot appear in it, fearing the grip of the exteriors (see item 6).
When it obtains the new HG in He’arat Hochma from Zivug Panim be
Panim de AVI, the Achoraim de Yesod de Abba shine in it from the
Chazeh downward too, through the end of its NHY. At that time it has
complete Achoraim, as it receives Achoraim de Ima in HGT and
Achoraim de Yesod de Abba in NHY.
However, before it obtains the Hey Hassadim from Zivug de AVI
Panim be Panim, the Achoraim de Abba cannot appear in it. This is

--- PAGE 564 ---
because it is Behinat He’arat Hochma without Hassadim and there is
no existence for Hochma without Hassadim, since Yesod Abba is long
and narrow. In other words, it stretches in He’arat Hochma below
Yesod de Ima, but it is narrow since it has no Hassadim (see Ohr
Pnimi item 45).
For this reason, the Ohr Achoraim de Yesod Abba does not shine in
NHY de ZA before it obtains the Hey Hassadim. This is the meaning
of, “He takes Hassadim and his Achor is complemented,” meaning
Achor de NHY, by the force of the Ohr Achoraim de Yesod Abba. This
is because when it has Hassadim, Yesod Abba can illuminate the
He’arat Hochma in it.
(Item 29)
12. What is Complete Achoraim de Nukva?
The entire construction of the Nukva is only of Gevurot. This is
because she begins from the Chazeh de ZA downward, where Yesod de
Ima has already stopped. Hence, her entire Behinat Achoraim is built
primarily of Behinat Yesod Abba, which is all Gevurot (see item 11).
This is the meaning of, “Abba founded a daughter.” Yet, when she was
in Behinat Achor be Achor, she used the Achoraim de ZA, and one
wall operated between them, meaning the Achoraim de HGT de ZA
(see item 12).
However, after ZA obtains the new HG from AVI, being Hey
Hassadim and Hey Gevurot, the wall de ZA is completed with the Hey
Hassadim, and the Achoraim de Nukva are completed with the Hey
Gevurot. After they are sweetened with Hassadim in NHY de ZA,
Yesod de Abba appears there and the Gevurot are sweetened and given
to the Nukva through a Zivug.
()
13. What is a Grip?
A Grip is like an Anaf that grips to the tree and sucks its Shefa through
its holding place. Similarly, the Klipa grips the place of lack that she
finds in the Kedusha. This place is her tube by which she sucks her

--- PAGE 565 ---
entire force and sustenance, according to the measure of dearth that
she finds there, see item 50.
(Item 26)
14. What are BDK HYA?
They are the Behinat Achoraim de AVI that fell in the place of ZON.
There is a hint in this combination of BDK HYA, where the entire
Behinat MAN de ZA that it raises to AVI have the power to induce a
Zivug Panim be Panim AVI to extend Mochin de Haya from there,
which is the Ohr Hochma. They come from the scrutinies that ZA
scrutinizes in these Achoraim de AVI. BDK refers to Tikun and
scrutiny, and HYA is the Ohr Hochma.
(Item 33)
15. What is a Cancellation?
When the Kli is no longer fitting to receive anything from the Ohr
Atzilut, it is completely cancelled from its erection. It is then
considered that the Kli has been broken.
However, when it is fitting to receive from the degree of Atzilut,
though from a smaller place than itself, and cannot receive from the
Ohr Elyon that belongs to its own degree, it is considered that the Kli
has been cancelled. This means that it does not operate in its function
in its fitting place, and that Kli was cancelled from the degree, though
the Kli has not been entirely broken, as it still receives Ohr. Though it
is below its value, it is nonetheless reception.
(Item 4)
16. What are Scrutinies?
As long as the parts of Behina Dalet are mixed inside the Kli, the Kli
is unfit to receive the Ohr Elyon. For this reason it needs scrutinies,
meaning to sort out the parts of Behina Dalet inside the Kli and to
separate them from there, and then the Kli becomes qualified to
receive the Ohr Elyon.
(Item 4)

--- PAGE 566 ---
17. What are the two lower thirds of Tifferet?
You already know that each Sefira of the Eser Sefirot has Eser Sefirot
in itself. When the Kli de Tifferet is discerned in itself, it is then
divided to Rosh, Toch, Sof, which are HBD, HGT, NHYM. They are
called “Three Thirds”, where the upper third is the place of GAR, and
the two lower thirds are the place of ZAT.
()
18. What are Gevurot?
Gevurot mean lack of Hassadim. Even though it is fitting to receive
Ohr Hochma, it is still called Gevurot since Ohr Hochma does not
exist in the Kli as long as there is no abundance of Hassadim in it.
(Item 30)
19. What is Grown?
The appearance of Ohr Hochma in the Partzuf makes it grown. This
means that it is completed bit-by-bit until it attains its Gadlut, which is
He’arat Hochma. For this reason He’arat Hochma is called Great
Ohr.
(Item 49)
20. What is Gadlut?
Mochin de Abba, meaning He’arat Hochma, is called Gadlut.
(Item 19)
21. What is Guf de Abba?
The Eser Sefirot de Rosh that come out of the Nikvey Eynaim are
always discerned as three Roshim: the GE are considered the first
Rosh, the Awzen, the second Rosh, and the Hotem and Peh, the third
Rosh.
Compared to the first Rosh, the two lower Roshim, are considered
AHP, in Behinat ZAT and Guf. The second Rosh is its Behinat HGT,
and the third Rosh is its Behinat NHYM.

--- PAGE 567 ---
Hence, the Eser Sefirot de Gadlut too, which came out in AVI de
Nekudim, are dominated by this arrangement. This is so because they
are first emanated from the Ohr Eynaim.
The Behinat Rosh ha Aleph came out first, called Histaklut Eynaim de
AVI on each other. Afterwards, the Behinat Rosh ha Bet came out,
called Guf de Abba and Guf de Ima. This is because Rosh ha Bet is
considered Guf compared to Rosh ha Aleph. After that the third Rosh
came out, called Yesodot (pl. for Yesod) de AVI, considered as such
with respect to Rosh ha Aleph, where the third Rosh is Behinat NHYM
de Rosh ha Aleph.
You will understand their stature according to their names. The first
Koma, called Histaklut Eynaim de AVI on each other, containing
Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut and Behina Gimel de Aviut are a
Hitkalelut of the two Komot Keter and Hochma. For this reason they
are called Galgalta ve Eynaim, named after the Upper Behinot, Keter
and Hochma.
The second Koma is called Guf de Abba, containing Behina Gimel de
Hitlabshut and Behina Bet de Aviut. It is called Awzen after the Upper
Behina from the perspective of its Aviut.
Also, Guf de Ima is called Awzen because it contains Behina Bet of
Aviut, which is Awzen, and Rosh ha Gimel, which is Hotem and Peh, is
called Yesodot de AVI. Thus, its Koma is in Behina Aleph, which is
ZON de Rosh, called HP.
It follows, that the names go hand in hand with the Komot. Although
these Guf de Abba ve Ima are not actual Behinat Guf, from Behinat
from above downward, but it is Behinat Rosh ha Gimel, and the
appellation Guf fits Rosh ha Aleph only.
(Item 43)
22. What is Guf de Ima?
See above answer 21.
23. What is Guf YESH?

--- PAGE 568 ---
YESHSUT is also divided into three Roshim as in AVI in answer 21.
Rosh ha Bet de YESHSUT is called Guf compared to Rosh ha Aleph
although in itself, it is a complete Rosh. Rosh is the Hey Hassadim in
it from the Behinat Hey YESH, and Rosh ha Bet is the Hey Gevurot in
it from the Behinat Tvuna, see answer 3.
(Item 6)
24. What is Guf de Tvuna?
See above answer 23.
25. What the Completion of the Construction of the Achoraim?
See above answer 11.
26. What is Complete Dvekut?
Complete Dvekut de AVI Panim be Panim is when Hochma de Abba
illuminates to Hochma de Ima, because Ima is cleaved entirely to
Abba.
(Item 42)
27. What are Dinim?
Two Behinot Dinim were made in Tzimtzum Bet when Hey Tata’a was
incorporated in the First Hey: the first is the First Hey that was mixed
with the Dinim de Hey Tata’a; this is Behinat Weak Dinim. The
second is the Hey Tata’a that is incorporated with the First Hey in the
place of the Hey Tata’a. This is Behinat Hard Dinim, meaning strong
Dinim, Behina Dalet itself.
(Item 7)
28. What are Strong Dinim?
See above answer 27.
(Item 8)
29. What is Habata of Panim?
Habata means bestowal. Habata of Panim means bestowal of He’arat
Hochma.
(Item 23)

--- PAGE 569 ---
30. What is Increasing half the Achoraim?
This means increasing the Achoraim de NHY that is missing while it is
Achor be Achor, by way of “their hinder parts were inward.”
(Item 30)
31. What are Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot?
The Eser Sefirot are discerned in Hey Behinot KHB ZON, meaning the
GAR are Behinat Atzmut. However, when their whole Atzmut is but
Ohr de Hassadim, the Hey Behinot are called HGT NH, meaning Hey
Hassadim.
If they are in Behinot Gevurot, meaning He’arat Hochma without
Hassadim, the Hey Behinot HGT NH are called KHB ZON.
If their Atzmut is Hassadim and they also have He’arat Hochma, they
are called Hey Hassadim HGT NH, and if they lack Hassadim, but
only He’arat Hochma is left in them, they are called Hey Gevurot
HGT NH.
(Item 42)
32. What is Diminution of Ohr?
If the Kli descends below its degree it causes the lessening of the Ohr
to the Kli, since the Elyon that descends to the place of the Tachton
becomes like it.
(Item 4)
33. What Histaklut Eynaim of AVI?
Eynaim is an appellation for Sefirat Hochma of Rosh. When Hochma
de Abba dispenses to Hochma de Ima, it is called Histaklut Eynaim of
AVI on each other, and this is Komat Keter de AVI. In YESHSUT,
when Hochma de Israel Saba gives to Hochma de Tvuna, it is called
Histaklut Eynaim of YESHSUT on each other, and this is Komat Keter
de YESHSUT.
(Item 42)
34. What is Histaklut Eynaim of YESHSUT?

--- PAGE 570 ---
See answer 33.
35. What is Raisng MAN?
MAN means inducing Zivug. It is always Behinat NHY or ZON. This is
so because the Nekeva is erected in Ohr Achoraim de Ima that is
cleaved only to Ohr de Hassadim, rejecting Hochma.
For this reason she does not bring her Panim to the Zachar to receive
He’arat Hochma, except if she has some element that compels her to.
This element is the Behinat ZON that Bina has a connection to, to
illuminate it in He’arat Hochma through the relation of Bina and ZON
de Ohr Yashar.
Hence, when ZON rises to her for MAN, she immediately stops her
Achoraim and brings her Panim back to Hochma, to receive He’arat
Hochma from him, mating Panim be Panim with him.
()
36. What is Dvekut Panim be Panim?
When AVI have Komat Keter, at which time Hochma de Abba gives to
Hochma de Bina, AVI are found cleaved Panim be Panim from their
Rosh to their Sof. It is so because then Ima is considered Behinat Ohr
Hochma, as AVI are in Hishtavut Tzura, called Dvekut.
However, when the Koma falls into Behinat Guf, at which time only
Bina de Abba administers to Bina de Ima, Ima is not entirely Behinat
Hochma, as is Abba, as she receives only from his Bina. There is an
apparent Shinui Tzura from Ima to Abba and thus, Zivug of Hochmot
(pl. for Hochma) de AVI is called “Complete Dvekut Panim be
Panim”.
Zivug de Binot (pl. for Bina) de AVI is called Some Dvekut de Panim
be Panim, because she still receives from Bina de Abba, containing
some He’arat Hochma, but is not complete Dvekut.
(Item 42)
37. What is Dvekut of the Klipot?

--- PAGE 571 ---
The Klipot cleave to the Achoraim de Nukva because the Nukva is
Behinat Sium on the Ohr Elyon. From her down it is a place of
darkness and not Ohr. Hence, there is Behinat Hishtavut Tzura at the
Nekudat Sium of NHY de Nukva to the Klipot and this is why it is
considered that the Klipot cleave there, see item 49.
(Item 26)
38. What is Hitpashtut Hey Gevurot?
The Shoresh of the Hey Hassadim is in Yesod, being below all the Hey
Hassadim. Yet, when they are not in Zivug, their Koma is even, as
there is Hitpashtut Hey Gevurot in them in Behinat from below
upward to Behinat from above downward in all the Hey Behinot HGT
NH.
(Item 41)
39. What is Zach?
He’arat Hochma received in the Kelim de Panim of the Nekeva which
is not first thickened in Ohr de Achoraim, is called Ohr Zach, see
answer 4.
(Item 24)
40. What is Had Samcha?
Before the Tikun Kavim, when ZAT were in one Kav one below the
other, they were called Had Samcha, meaning One Line.
(Item 56)
41. What is the Sustenance of the Klipot?
See below answer 49.
(Item 21)
42. What are the Armies of Malchut?
All the Partzufim in BYA come from the diminishing of the Koma of
Malchut de Atzilut, and all that is there. For this reason they are
considered the soldiers of Malchut and her armies.
(Item 14)

--- PAGE 572 ---
43. What are the Parts of Nukva?
Only the Behinat Nekevot of the Hey Partzufim of Atzilut were made
of these seven Melachim that fell to BYA. However, the Zecharim
were made of the new MA, as will be explained in its place, hence
they are named “Parts of the Nukva”.
(Item 11)
44. What is Half the Achoraim?
See below answer 45.
(Item 30)
45. What is Half a Wall?
There are two distances and covers on the Ohr Hochma: One – by the
force of the Achoraim de Ima. This cover is called “The Wall of
HGT”, as it is present only in HGT until the Chazeh.
There is also Behinat covering by the force of the Achoraim de Yesod
Abba. They too cover Ohr Hochma as long as there is no Ohr de
Hassadim in the Partzuf. This cover is called Achoraim de NHY, as it
operates primarily in the NHY, since this is its place.
When the ZON is in Katnut and their whole Tikun comes to them from
the Achoraim de Ima, which is the Wall of HGT, you find that they
both use this wall of HGT, half for ZA and half Nukva. This is because
the wall of NHY that belongs to Nukva has no place to appear because
of the fear from the exteriors, so that they will not suck from it. This is
because the Wall of NHY appears only when the Partzuf is fitting for
He’arat Hochma (See answer 11)
(Item 47)
46. What is The Lower Half of Tifferet?
The two lower thirds of Tifferet are called “The Lower Half of
Tifferet”, whose meaning has been explained above (item 17).
(Item 61)
47. What is The Upper Half of Tifferet?

--- PAGE 573 ---
This refers to the upper third through the Chazeh, which is the Behinat
GAR de Sefirat Tifferet (see answer 16).
(Item 61)
48. What is a Drop that Raises the Fetus?
The Behinat Hassadim and Gevurot dispensed from Zivug Panim be
Panim de AVI that contain He’arat Hochma, are the Behinat “Drop
that Raises the Fetus”, which are ZON. It means that through it they
attain He’arat Hochma and become grown, as there is only Gadlut in
He’arat Hochma (as written in item 20).
(Item 32)
49. What is the Yenika of the Klipot?
The essence of the substance of the Klipot is complete evil. It means
that it is unfitting to receive at all, as they are from the Behinat Vacant
Halal, which is from the restricted Behina Dalet to receive nothing of
the Ohr Elyon. You therefore find that it is discerned as substance
without any sustenance.
However, after the breaking of the vessels because of the good and
evil mixed in them, these Kelim fell to those Klipot, and became a
Neshama and sustenance to them. This is so because although the Orot
departed from the Kelim, there still remained remnants of the Orot in
them, and these remnants became Behinat minute Ohr that shines and
sustains the Klipot.
Thus the structure of the Partzufim and the Olamot was made for
them, like the BYA de Kedusha. This was enough for them for their
essential structure. However, after the sin of Etz ha Daat, and also
when people sin, by that they cause proliferation of sustenance and
Shefa to the Sitra Achra, according to the measure of the flaw that
they cause in the Kedusha.
This is so because the Guf of Adam is from the Sigim of the Melachim
that were not sorted. It is mingled, good and bad, as it is written, “a
wild ass’s colt is born a man.”

--- PAGE 574 ---
When purifying one’s Guf, separating the evil from it, then one
receives Upper He’arot to one’s Neshama and Nefesh, according to
the measure of the purification. Afterwards, when one sins, the Orot
depart and the Levushim from these He’arot fall to the Klipot. It is just
as it happened in the breaking of the vessels, where because Behina
Dalet was mixed in the Kelim, the Ohr was forced to leave and the
Kelim fell to the Klipa and became sustenance for them.
It is exactly the same when one sins, meaning when one mixes that
evil that he has already purified himself from and separated it from his
Guf. The Upper He’arot immediately depart one’s Nefesh, and the
Levushim of these He’arot fall to the Klipot and become sustenance
and nourishment for them.
This is the meaning of the pursuit of the evil inclination and the Sitra
Achra to cause the righteous to sin and cling to Kedusha, as they have
no sustenance without it. When good and Kedusha proliferate, so do
their lives. In other words, the greater one is, the more good and
Kedusha he has.
You find that when the Sitra Achra fails one into sinning, causing the
good and Kedusha to depart and their Levushim fall to the portion of
the Klipot, they receive abundance of Shefa and sustenance from it.
Hence, “The greater one is from one’s friend, the greater is one’s
desire,” because the Sitra Achra chases him more.
(Item 18)
50. What are YESHSUT?
Behinat ZA de AVI, meaning their AHP, is called YESHSUT. In the
beginning, during the Zivug de Histaklut Eynaim on each other,
YESHSUT and AVI are considered united in a single Partzuf.
Afterwards, when AVI return to Behinat Zivug Achor be Achor,
YESHSUT depart from them and exit as a separate Rosh in Komat
AHP, becoming a separate Partzuf in themselves (see item 21).
(Item 40)
51. What is the Force of the Klipot?

--- PAGE 575 ---
The Levushim of the Orot de Kedusha leave the Kelim because of the
mixture of evil in them. These Levushim fall into the portion of the
Klipot, and the remains that were left of the Orot that were in them
add sustenance and force in the Klipot (see above item 49).
(Item 26)
52. What are the General Bina and Tvuna?
When the Hey Tata’a descends from the Eynaim de AVI to their
general Malchut, the YESHSUT, which are AHP de AVI, reconnect
with the Rosh, which are AVI. Thus, Bina and Tvuna connect into a
single Partzuf. This is called the general Bina and Tvuna together in a
single Partzuf.
(Item 48)
53. What is the General Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot?
The General Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot means, as they were
when they were rooted in Yesod de AB. This is because there the
Shoresh of the Hey Gevurot appeared in the Ohr Malchut that clothed
in Kli de Yesod as well as in Malchut (see Part 5, Ohr Pnimi item 35).
Also, the general Hey Hassadim were rooted there in Behinat
Truncated Vav (as written in the above Ohr Pnimi).
Plain Hey Hassadim and Hey Gevurot means that when they come in a
Zivug, each has HGT NH, both in Hassadim and in Gevurot, which are
actual five Sefirot. However, the general Hey Hassadim and Hey
Gevurot are only one Sefira, either of Yesod, or of Malchut.
(Item 43)
54. What is Disclosed?
The Orot de Hochma have a way of appearing when they are covered
in Achoraim de Ima, but in Behinat Levush Dak. When they do not
have that Levush Dak too, they are too exposed, and He’arat Hochma
without any Levush comes to the first four Melachim de Nekudim
from Achoraim de Ima. This is why their breaking was hard.

--- PAGE 576 ---
There is also exposed Hassadim and Gevurot. This is a different
matter, because as long as there is no He’arat Hochma in HG, they are
considered covered in the Achoraim de Ima, as in this cover they are
corrected in He’arat GAR. When they have He’arat Hochma, they are
regarded as appearing outwardly from the covering of Ima, as then
they have their own stance.
(Item 49)
55. What is Mochin?
The GAR are considered Mochin, and this appellation applies
primarily when the Atzmut are HG, not having He’arat GAR.
(Item 38)
56. What is Death?
Histalkut Ohr Atzilut from the Kli, meaning He’arat Hochma, is
considered a dead Kli, as there is no sustenance for the Kli except in
He’arat Hochma. For this reason the Ohr Hochma is called Ohr Haya,
meaning having precisely that corruption, when she is no longer
qualified to receive the Ohr Atzilut any more, meaning containing that
mixture of Behina Dalet.
(Item 4)
57. What is the Death of the Melachim?
After they have been disqualified from receiving the Ohr Hochma
anymore, they are severed from Kav Ein Sof. This is considered that
they have fallen to BYA and died, since Kav Ein Sof ends in Atzilut.
(Item 55)
58. What is Covered?
See answer 54.
(Item 3)
59. What are MAN?
See answer 35.
(Item 39)

--- PAGE 577 ---
60. What is Masach Bina?
The Achoraim de Bina that cover and conceal the Ohr Hochma is
called Masach Bina.
(Item 50)
61. What are Mingled in the Klipot?
The Kelim de SAG that are mixed in Behina Dalet, meaning the Kelim
of the seven Melachim that fell to BYA, are called Sigim. The Nitzotzin
that descended to revive the Kelim mixed in these Sigim.
(Item 4)
62. What is the Place of the Gripping of the Klipot?
The place of lack in Kedusha is the place of the gripping of the Klipa
because the Kelim and the Levushim that belong to that place of lack
are in the section of the Klipot. For this reason they too suck from the
Shefa that belongs to those Kelim and Levushim in their authority.
(Item 26)
63. What is the Place of BYA?
The place for BYA was prepared during Tzimtzum Bet. This is because
the Hey Tata’a rose there to the Eynaim and the AHP departed from
the degree in RTS and the point of Sium that was in Malchut de NHY
rose to the Behinat Malchut de Hochma de NHY.
Bina and ZON de NHY went outside, below the Sium of Kav de Ein
Sof. In that, they were separated from the Atzilut and became a place
for the Separated BYA, from which those three Olamot were later
formed.
(Item 57)
64. What is the Place of Rosh?
From the place of the Chazeh to the Peh of the Rosh, it is always
considered to be the place of the Rosh of the Partzuf Tachton. This is
because each Tachton comes out from Masach de Tabur de Partzuf
Elyon that consists of the Eser Sefirot de Guf of the Elyon that stand in
this place from the Chazeh to its Peh.

--- PAGE 578 ---
After the Hizdakchut Masach to the point of Hishtavut to the Masach
de Malchut de Rosh, it rises along with the Reshimot de Sefirot de Guf
and is renewed in the Hitkalelut of the Zivug Elyon de Rosh.
The Koma, educed in the renewal of this Zivug belongs to the Tachton.
Thus, the Shorashim of the lower Eser Sefirot, called Rosh, extend
from the Eser Sefirot de Guf de Elyon that stand from the Chazeh de
Elyon to its Peh. For this reason the Rosh of the Tachton clothes over
them, since this is its place and its Shoresh.
(Item 45)
65. What is a Minute Light?
The Kelim de Melachim that remained in BYA after the Partzufim de
Atzilut were sorted from them, are called Sigim. They are in the
section of the Klipot, which became Behinat Neshama and sustenance
for them, called “Minute Light” of Kedusha. It means a small and fine
He’arah that sustains the Klipot (See answer 49).
(Item 18)
66. What are Nitzotzot that Quenched?
Nitzotzin mean parts of Ohr Hozer. The Orot that descended from AVI
from above downward to clothe in the Melachim were each clothed in
Ohr Hozer. When the Kelim broke, these Behinot Ohr Hozer
descended along with them. Since the Zivug stopped from them, they
are considered to have quenched, been put out, having no more of the
He’arat Zivug.
(Item 9)
67. What are Nitzotzot that were not Scrutinized?
See above answer 66.
(Item 22)
68. What are Strong Nitzotzin?
They are mixed with the Atzmut of Behina Dalet.
(Item 8)

--- PAGE 579 ---
69. What is a Fall?
When the degree descends to a lower degree, it is called “A Fall”. This
is because the Elyon that descends to the place of the Tachton
becomes like it.
(Item 26)
70. What are Sigim?
See answer 61.
(Item 2)
71. What is a Thickening in the Achoraim?
When the Ohr Panim is first received in the Kelim de Achoraim before
it comes to its Kelim de Panim, the Ohr receives Behinat covering of
the Achoraim as it passes there. By that the Ohr thickens and lessens,
and does not shine in its fullest measure even after it enters the Kelim
de Panim.
(Item 24)
72. What is Etz ha Daat Good and Bad?
Etz ha Daat was mixed with good and evil. It means that Behina
Dalet, called evil, was mixed there. After Adam ha Rishon had eaten
from Etz ha Daat, he lost his first Guf, which was all good, and a Guf
from Behinat Mishcha de Hivia (Aramaic: lit. The serpent’s skin)
came to him, mixed of good and evil too. For this reason he is
unfitting to clothe the Kedusha, except through purification and
separation of the evil from the Guf.
(Item 16)
73. What is Panim be Panim?
When the Nekeva receives the Ohr Elyon from the Panim of the
Zachar into her Kelim de Panim, it is called Zivug Panim be Panim.
(Item 24)
74. What are Parts of the Guf?

--- PAGE 580 ---
Netzah and Hod from Behinat Achor be Achor before they have
acquired Behinat Tikun Kavim, are only one Kli, without any apparent
difference from one to another.
(Item 46)
75. What is the Panim of the Zachar?
The administration of He’arat Hochma is the Panim of the Zachar,
and the Kli de Panim, ascribed to the reception of He’arat Hochma, is
the Panim of the Nekeva.
(Item 23)
76. What is the Panim of the Nekeva?
See above answer 75.
77. What is Panim be Achor?
This refers to the Panim of the Zachar in the Achoraim of the Nekeva.
This is because even when the Nekeva is already fitting to receive the
Ohr Panim from the Panim of the Zachar, because she is corrected
with the Achoraim de Ima, she still craves Hassadim more than
Hochma.
For this reason she does not stop her Achoraim to return her Panim to
the Zachar without an element that obligates her. Thus, she receives
the Ohr Panim of the Zachar through her Kelim de Achoraim, from
which they are administered to the Kelim de Panim. This Zivug is
called Panim be Achor.
(Item 23)
78. What is Waste?
Waste refers to the Sigim that remain after the scrutinies (see Sigim)
(Item 9)
79. What is Small?
See answer 19.
80. What is Katnut?
See answer 19.

--- PAGE 581 ---
81. What are Complete Klipot?
This refers to the actual substance of the Klipot, which are the
complete evil, unfitting at all to receive the Ohr Elyon, which is the
restricted Behina Dalet that remained in Behinat Vacant Halal.
(Item 18)
82. What is Klipat Noga?
The Behinat Nitzotzin that have a mixture of good and bad are the
Klipat Noga. When she receives the Ohr in her good part, it is
dispensed to her bad part too.
(Item 22)
83. What is Some Dvekut?
See answer 37.
(Item 62)
84. What is Some Breaking?
Some Breaking indicates that the Kli has not been disqualified from
receiving Atzilut altogether, but was disqualified to receive from its
own degree. It is still qualified to receive in a lower Behina it had
been in, and this is also called “Cancellation”.
(Item 4)
85. What is Some Tikun?
Tikun Kavim from Behinat Achor be Achor is considered “Some
Tikun”. This is because the Ohr Achoraim de Ima connects all the
Sefirot until there is no oppositeness between them and equalizes their
Tzura to each other.
(Item 56)
86. What is a Connection?
The first Koma de AVI, called Histaklut Eynaim de AVI, is also called
“The Rosh de AVI” (see answer 21).
(Item 69)
87. What is Rosh de AVI?

--- PAGE 582 ---
Rosh ha Aleph de YESHSUT that emerged from the Chazeh upwards is
called Rosh de YESHSUT (See answer 45).
(Item 45)
88. What is Rosh de YESHSUT?
Rosh ha Aleph de YESHSUT that emerged from the Chazeh upwards is
called Rosh de YESHSUT (See answer 63).
(Item 45)
89. What is the Breaking of the Vessels?
When the Kli was disqualified from receiving the Ohr, it is considered
that the Kli broke.
(Item 26)
90. What is Upper Third of Tifferet?
When the Kli de Tifferet was divided into Eser Sefirot, three thirds are
discerned in it: the upper third through the Chazeh is the GAR in it,
from Chazeh to Tabur is HGT in it, and from Tabur down it is NHYM
in it.
(Item 45)
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 583 ---
T Q T
ABLE OF UESTIONS FOR OPICS
91. Why are Nekudim called HaVaYaH de SAG?
92. Where is the Malchut in each Sefira from?
93. Why are there Klipot opposite the BON from its Rosh to its
Raglaim?
94. Why is there no Yenika to the Sitra Achra from GAR de ZA?
95. Why is Malchut called Nekuda?
96. What are the four situations until Panim be Panim, and where are
there three situations until Panim be Panim?
97. What causes the state of Panim be Achor?
98. What causes the state of Panim be Panim?
99. Where are there four situations until Panim be Panim, and where
are there three situations until Panim be Panim?
100. How do the HG complement a complete Achor for ZA and a
complete Achor for Nukva?
101. How does the MAN that is raised to ZON extend new Orot, if every
Hidush Ohr should be from Ein Sof?
102. What are the GAR de ZA that take from AVI?
103. What are the two reasons in the HG?
104. How many Partzufim came out in the Nekudim?
105. What is the reason for the breaking of the vessels?
106. Which Orot were cancelled from AVI?
107. What is the Koma of Melech ha Daat?
108. What is the Koma of Melech ha Hesed?

--- PAGE 584 ---
109. What is the Koma of Melech ha Gevura?
110. What is Komat Tifferet until the Chazeh?
111. What is Komat Two Lower Thirds of Tifferet?
112. What is Komat NH?
113. What is the Komat Yesod?
114. What is the Komat Malchut?
115. How did Gadlut de AVI de Nekudim emerge?
116. How did Komat YESHSUT de Nekudim emerge?
117. How did the Zivug of the two Ketarim (pl. for Keter) in Daat de
Nekudim emerge?
118. Why is there only HG in Daat de AVI?
119. What are the NRNHY de ZA?
120. Why is the Yesod entirely Panim, and has no Achoraim at all?
121. Why is Tifferet divided into two halves, more than the other
Sefirot?
122. Why are the Gufim de AVI drawn to the place of DHGT?
123. Why is Upper AVI not regarded as the Rosh of ZON, but as
YESHSUT?
124. Why did the Achoraim de AVI not fall to BYA like the ZON?
125. Why did the Achoraim de AVI fall to Behinat Guf?
126. Where did the Hitpashtut KHB to the new Kelim de HGT come
from?
127. Why were the Achoraim de AVI made into Behinat MAN that the
ZON raise to them?
128. Which Behinot Kelim of the Seven Melachim fell to Yetzira and
Assiya?
129. Where did the Orot of the Seven Melachim leave their Reshimot
after their departure?

--- PAGE 585 ---
130. Why where the Reshimot arranged in NHYM de Atzilut in an
opposite order, Daat below, and Tifferet above all?
131. Why did the Reshimot of the Dalet Melachim DHGT fell to NHYM
de Atzilut?
132. Why did the Reshimo of the Upper third of Tifferet remain in its
place unchanged?
133. Which change was there in the Reshimo of the two lower thirds of
Tifferet?
134. Who brought the Reshimot back to the new Kelim DHGT de
Atzilut?
135. Why did the four Melachim DHGT descend to GAR de Beria,
Yetzira, and Assiya?
136. Why were there two falls in the Melachim of DHGT, one for GAR
de BYA, and another for NHYM de BYA?
137. Who magnified the Kli de Keter up to the place of Chazeh de
Tifferet?
138. Who complemented the new Kli de Tifferet from the place of the
Chazeh to its Sium?
139. How do the new Kelim de HGT come from Hitpashtut KHB de
Nekudim?
140. How was the Zivug of the two Ketarim de Daat made after the
breaking of the four Melachim NHYM?
141. Who reared the Kelim of the new Tifferet, Netzah, and Hod?
142. What are the causes for the elicitation of the Katnut and Gadlut de
AVI de Nekudim?
143. Who raised MAN for the Upper Zivug AB SAG for the Gadlut de
AVI?
144. What did the inner Orot that came out through the Tabur and the
Yesod de AK do?

--- PAGE 586 ---
145. Why did the GAR and ZAT de Eser Sefirot de Nekudim emerge at
once?
146. Since the Seven Melachim do not belong to AVI, which are only
from Behina Bet, they had to emerge from NHY de AK.
147. What is the essence of the Achoraim de AVI that fell?
148. Where is the place of the fall of each of the four Komot de
Achoraim de AVI?
150. What are the four reasons that preceded the Zivug AVI Panim be
Panim?
151. What are the twelve actions accustomed in every Melech of the
four Melachim DHGT?
152. What are the four reasons that preceded the Zivug Panim be
Panim de YESHSUT?
153. What are the eleven operations that were in each of the four
Melachim TNHYM?
154. Why did the ascent of Malchut in the Zivug of the two Ketarim de
Daat tie all the VAK?
155. What are the 103 operations that emerged from one another in an
order of cause and effect from after the situation de Achor be
Achor de AVI until after Tikun Kavim of the new Kelim Tifferet,
Netzah, and Hod, made after the breaking of the vessels?

--- PAGE 587 ---
91. Why are Nekudim called HaVaYaH de SAG?
It is so because there is Koma of Behina Bet in Behinat Hitlabshut
there, which is Behinat Israel Saba, and YESHSUT is Behinat
HaVaYaH de SAG.
()
92. Where is the Malchut in each Sefira from?
Through the ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim that was in
Tzimtzum Bet. It means that when the Malchut rose in Hochma,
Malchut mixed and connected in each and every Sefira up to Hochma.
()
93. Why are there Klipot opposite the BON from its Rosh to its
Raglaim?
Because the Seven Melachim, named BON, emerged in a complete
Partzuf Rosh and Guf, and broke Panim and Achor. For this reason
they have Klipot from its Rosh to its Raglaim, meaning in its entire
RTS. All the Behinot Rosh of the Seven Melachim fell to Beria, all the
Behinot Toch of the Seven Melachim fell to Yetzira, and all the
Behinot Sof of the Seven Melachim fell to Assiya.
()
94. Why is there no Yenika to the Sitra Achra from GAR de ZA?
This is because during the Katnut, it lacks GAR, as it is so from its
very creation. However, during the Gadlut it attains the GAR in
Behinat addition, and the Klipot have no Yenika from there.
This is so because when the Tachtonim blemish, before the flaw
appears, the GAR immediately leave the ZA. This is so because as long
as it does not come with the Partzuf from the beginning of its creation,
it can leave the Partzuf when necessary.
()
95. Why is Malchut called Nekuda?

--- PAGE 588 ---
Malchut is always called Nekuda, after the root Malchut over which
there was the first Tzimtzum. Therefore, the actual carrier of the
Tzimtzum and the Masach over which the Zivug is made, are called
Nekuda in every place.
()
96. What are the four situations until Panim be Panim, and where are
there three situations until Panim be Panim?
The four situations are Achor be Achor, Achor be Panim, Panim be
Achor, and Panim be Panim. It means that when the Zachar and
Nukva lack GAR because of the ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the
Eynaim, the first Tikun that suffices to support them in Atzilut is Achor
be Achor. It means that they obtain the Ohr Achoraim of Upper Ima.
Because she craves Ohr de Hassadim, by way of “because He
delighteth in mercy,” you find that she rejects the Ohr Hochma.
Thus, when they are incorporated in this Ohr and in these Achoraim,
they are not at all blemished due to the lack of Hochma in them
because of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim. This is because even if they
could receive Hochma, they would still reject its reception due to the
craving for Hassadim imprinted in the Achoraim of Upper Ima.
Hence, the Achoraim de Ima serves them as He’arat GAR, and this is
the first Tikun, called Achor be Achor.
The second situation is Achor be Panim. Besides the diminution of the
lessening of He’arat Hochma by the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, there
is lessening and diminution of He’arat Hochma in the Kelim de Panim
of the Nekeva as well.
Because of the blockage on Ohr de Hassadim that there is in her
Kelim de Panim, she is unfit to receive He’arat Hochma, as there
He’arat Hochma is not received in the Partzuf without Hassadim.
Thus, after the lessening because of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim was
corrected by the above Zivug de Achor be Achor, the Zivug of Achor
be Panim was made. The Zachar gives her Ohr de Hassadim

--- PAGE 589 ---
abundantly and corrects the Kelim de Panim of the Nekeva, thus
qualifying her to be fit to receive He’arat Hochma in them.
The third situation is Panim be Achor. This comes to them by the
Zivug Elyon de AB SAG that lowers the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim
and returns the HB to the Rosh. At that time the Zachar acquires his
Ohr Panim as in the beginning, prior to the lessening.
However, the Nekeva does not return her Panim to the Panim de
Zachar to receive He’arat Hochma without a reason that compels her
to it. This is so because her Achoraim are in the form of Bina de Ohr
Yashar, by way of, “because He delighteth in mercy.”
Thus, at that time the Nekeva receives the Ohr Panim from the Zachar
through her Achoraim. The He’arat Hochma is greatly diminished by
that, and this Zivug is called Panim be Achor. The Panim of the
Zachar dispense to the Nekeva through her Achoraim and the Kelim
de Panim receive from the Kelim de Achoraim.
The fourth situation is Panim be Panim. This comes to them only
through raising MAN from Behinat ZON, since Bina is connected with
the ZON by way of the Eser Sefirot de Ohr Yashar, where Bina
dispenses them He’arat Hochma.
Thus, when ZON rise to her to MAN, she stops her Achoraim and
returns her Panim to the Hochma to receive He’arat Hochma from
him for the ZON, and in that state she mates with the Hochma Panim
be Panim.
(Items 23-25 and Ohr Pnimi there)
97. What causes the state of Panim be Achor?
The Zachar acquires his Behinat Panim through the Zivug Elyon de
AB SAG that lowers the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim and returns the
HB to the Rosh. However, the Nekeva is still in need of raising MAN,
hence their Zivug is made in Behinat Panim be Achor.
()
98. What causes the state of Panim be Panim?

--- PAGE 590 ---
Raising MAN to the Bina from the Behinat ZON awakens the Bina to
return Panim to Hochma (see answer 96).
()
99. Where are there four situations until Panim be Panim, and where
are there three situations until Panim be Panim?
All the situations, Achor be Achor, Achor be Panim, Panim be Achor,
and Panim be Panim, are implemented in ZON. However, Behinat
Achor be Panim does not apply in AVI, only Achor be Achor, Panim
be Achor, and Panim be Panim.
()
100. How do the HG complement a complete Achor for ZA and a
complete Achor for Nukva?
When the ZON are in Behinat Achor be Achor, there is only the wall
of HGT in them, being the Behinat Achoraim de Ima (See answer 96).
You find, that they both use this Achoraim, half for ZA and half for
Nukva.
The Achoraim of the NHY are absent in both, as they are in the form
of, “and all their hinder parts were inward.” This is because the
Achoraim de NHY are from Behinat Yesod de Abba, which appears
only through Hassadim and new Gevurot, which are in He’arat
Hochma.
Hence, when HG come from the Zivug Panim be Panim de AVI, the
Achoraim de NHY are completed for both, ZA takes the Hassadim for
itself, and gives the Gevurot to the Nukva (see above answer 45).
()
101. How does the MAN that is raised to ZON extend new Orot, if every
Hidush Ohr should be from Ein Sof?
As the lower Adam raises MAN to ZON through good deeds, so the
ZON scrutinize from the Achoraim de AVI that fell to their place and
raise MAN for AVI. Also, AVI extend Mochin from Ohr Ein Sof above

--- PAGE 591 ---
them through all the degrees until the first Partzuf Elyon, and lowers
them to the one below it, and so they are passed to ZON.
Thus, any raising of MAN from the righteous induces a new descent of
the Ohr from Ein Sof itself, as there is no Hidush of Ohr in all the
Olamot that does not extend from Ein Sof, and remember that.
()
102. What are the GAR de ZA that take from AVI?
They are primarily Hassadim and Gevurot, though there is He’arat
Hochma in them according to the measure of Koma present in AVI at
that time. If they are in Komat Keter, these Mochin are from Behinat
He’arat Hochma de Partzuf Keter. If they are in Komat Hochma, the
Mochin are found to be from Behinat He’arat Hochma de Partzuf
Hochma etc.
()
103. What are the two reasons in the HG?
The first is that these new HG where there is He’arat Hochma rear
and complete the Achoraim de ZON (See answer 100). The second is
that they acquire the Mochin de Panim, which are their GAR, and then
mate Panim be Panim.
(Item 29)
104. How many Partzufim came out in the Nekudim?
Three Partzufim came out in Nekudim: AVI in four Komot, whose
Gufim are Daat, Hesed, Gevura, and the upper third of Tifferet until
the Chazeh.
The second Partzuf is YESHSUT in four Komot. Their Gufim are the
two lower thirds of Tifferet, NH, Yesod, and Malchut.
The third is the Zivug of the two Ketarim in Daat that came out a Rosh
without a Guf.
()
105. What is the reason for the breaking of the vessels?

--- PAGE 592 ---
There were many causes there, but what caused their death and
descent to BYA was the mixture of Behina Dalet, which is unfit to
receive from the Ohr Elyon, that mingled in these Kelim of the Seven
Melachim. Thus, when the Ohr came to meet Behina Dalet, it
immediately departed and separated itself from the entire Kli, and the
Kli died and fell to BYA, meaning below the line of Ein Sof that ends
with the Karka de Atzilut.
They fell there into the Klipot, and after they are sorted and the
mixtures of Behina Dalet are separated from them, they are returned
to Atzilut by way of the revival of the dead, and this is done by the
new MA.
()
106. Which Orot were cancelled from AVI?
Only the Orot that came out of Zivug de Gadlut de AVI were
cancelled, but what was present in AVI from the beginning of their
creation was not cancelled at all.
(Item 31)
107. What is the Koma of Melech ha Daat?
His Rosh, meaning the Behinat from below upward, is the Rosh de
AVI, called Histaklut Eynaim de AVI at each other. He emerged on
Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut and Behina Gimel from the Aviut, which
were incorporated in one another, eliciting Komat Keter. The Guf of
this Komat Keter, which is its from above downward, expanded in
Melech ha Daat, and it is Behinat Yechida de ZON.
()
108. What is the Koma of Melech ha Hesed?
His from below upward is called Guf de Abba, which came out on
Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut and Behina Bet from the Aviut, whose
Koma is up to Hochma. The Guf of this Koma expanded in Melech ha
Hesed and it is Behinat Haya de ZA.
(Items 42, 43)

--- PAGE 593 ---
109. What is the Koma of Melech ha Gevura?
His from below upward is called Guf de Ima, which came out on
merely Aviut de Behina Bet, whose Koma is up to Bina, and the Guf
expanded in Melech ha Gevura, and it is Behinat Neshama de ZA.
(Item 43)
110. What is Komat Tifferet until the Chazeh?
His from below upward is called Yesodot (pl. for Yesod) de AVI. He
came out on Aviut de Behina Aleph, whose Koma is up to ZA, and
from above downward of this Koma expanded in Melech ha Tifferet
until his Chazeh, and it is Behinat Ruach de ZA.
(Item 45)
111. What is Komat Two Lower Thirds of Tifferet?
His from below upward is called the Rosh of YESHSUT and Histaklut
Eynaim de YESHSUT at each other. He emerged on a Masach from
Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut and from Aviut de Behina Bet whose
Koma is up to Hochma. His Guf expanded in Melech ha Tifferet in his
lower two thirds of the Chazeh down to his Sium, and it is Behinat
Haya de Neshama de ZA.
(Item 45)
112. What is Komat NH?
His from below upward is called Guf de YESHSUT. He emerged on
Masach de Behina Bet, and his Guf expanded in the Melech de Netzah
and Hod, and he is Behinat Neshama from the Neshama de ZA.
(Item 46)
113. What is the Komat Yesod?
His from below upward is called Yesodot de YESHSUT, which came
out on Aviut of Behina Aleph. His Koma is up to ZA, his Guf expanded
in Melech ha Yesod, and he is Behinat Ruach de ZA of the Neshama.
(Item 47)
114. What is the Komat Malchut?

--- PAGE 594 ---
His from below upward is called Malchut de YESHSUT. He emerged
on Masach de Behinat Shoresh, whose Koma is up to Malchut. His
from above downward expanded in the seventh Melech, which is
Malchut, and he is Behinat Nefesh de Neshama de ZA.
(Item 47)
115. How did Gadlut de AVI de Nekudim emerge?
See below answer 150.
116. How did Komat YESHSUT de Nekudim emerge?
See below answer 152.
117. How did the Zivug of the two Ketarim (pl. for Keter) in Daat de
Nekudim emerge?
See below answer 154.
118. Why is there only HG in Daat de AVI?
The whole return of Panim de Ima to Panim de Abba was primarily in
order to dispense He’arat Hochma to the ZON by the force of the
connection that she has to administer He’arat Hochma to the ZON
from the relation of Ohr Yashar. Hence, after her Zivug Panim be
Panim with Abba, she still receives from him only as much as Bina de
Ohr Yashar administers Hochma to the ZON de Ohr Yashar.
It is known that the essence of ZON de Ohr Yashar is Ohr de
Hassadim, but in He’arat Hochma that Bina dispenses it. Hence, here
too she gives it primarily only Hassadim and Gevurot, but only with
He’arat Hochma.
For this reason, Ima does not receive Ohr Hochma in Keter from Abba
even in AVI, which are in Komat Keter, but only He’arat Hochma in
the ZON de Keter. This is a measure of a Koma from below upward in
AVI, called Daat de AVI, and discerned as Behinat Rosh of Melech ha
Daat.
(Item 41 and Ohr Pnimi item 9)
119. What are the NRNHY de ZA?

--- PAGE 595 ---
Two factors operate together in the values of the five Komot de
NRNHY de ZA: the first is the measure of the Koma de AVI itself. This
extends from the state of Panim be Achor de AVI, meaning according
to the place of the descent of the Hey Tata’a.
If up to the Peh, they have Komat Keter; if up to the Hotem, they have
Komat Hochma; and if up to the Awzen, they have Komat Bina. If
returning back to the Eynaim, they have Komat ZA.
The second element is the Behinat MAN that rose to Ima, awakening
her to the Zivug Panim be Panim, when they do not extend from the
entire Koma de AVI, but only from the He’arat Hochma de ZON in the
same Koma AVI de ZON are. Thus, if AVI are in Komat Keter, He’arat
Hochma in ZON de Keter extends, and it is Yechida de ZA. If AVI are
in Komat Hochma, only He’arat Hochma extends in ZON de Hochma,
which is Haya de ZA. If AVI are in Komat Bina, He’arat Hochma is
extended in ZON de Bina, and she is Neshama de ZA.
()
120. Why is the Yesod entirely Panim, and has no Achoraim at all?
Because the Achoraim de AVI fell and were cancelled, meaning only
what came to them in Behinat addition to their actual creation is
Behinat Achor be Achor. Hence, the Achoraim did not fall from the
Behinat Yesodot de AVI, as AVI have already returned Achor be Achor,
even before the Zivug Yesodot de AVI emerged, meaning right after the
Guf de Ima was cancelled. For this reason the Orot of Yesod are
entirely Panim from the Behinat beginning of their emanation, and it
contains no Behinat Achoraim that descended from it at all.
(Item 44)
121. Why is Tifferet divided into two halves, more than the other
Sefirot?
Because Tifferet relates to the Hey Hassadim as Bina to the Hey
Behinot. Thus, Bina is divided into two halves, Bina and Tvuna. Bina
is Ohr Hassadim without Hochma and it is Behinat GAR, meaning

--- PAGE 596 ---
before she emanated the ZON de Ohr Yashar. Tvuna is in He’arat
Hochma, and she is Behinat ZAT de Bina.
When she emanated ZON de Ohr Yashar in He’arat Hochma, she
came out from Behinat Atzmut of Bina, which is mere Ohr Hassadim,
and acquired a new name, Tvuna. She is Behinat He’arat Hochma that
remains in the Shoresh Bina even after she emanated to ZON, hence
Tvuna is considered ZAT de Bina.
Since the Tifferet is Behinat Bina of the Hey Hassadim, it is therefore
divided as Bina is, into GAR until the Chazeh, and to ZAT, from the
Chazeh down to its Sium. It too, like the Bina, only Ohr de Hassadim
illuminate in its GAR until the Chazeh, and the He’arat Hochma
disappears there in Yesod de Bina. In its ZAT from the Chazeh down, it
is in disclosed He’arat Hochma since the Yesod de Ima has already
stopped in the place of the Chazeh.
()
122. Why are the Gufim de AVI drawn to the place of DHGT?
Because the DHGT in the Hey Hassadim are like the KHBD de Hey
Behinot KHB ZON. For this reason their Orot were drawn from their
corresponding relation in the Hey Behinot. Ohr Yechida extends to the
Daat; Ohr Haya extends to the Hesed, which is Behinat Hochma de
Hassadim. Ohr Haya extends to the Hesed, which is Behinat Hochma
de Hassadim, Ohr Neshama extends to the Gevura, which is Behinat
Bina de Hey Hassadim, and Ohr Ruach extends to the Tifferet, which
is Behinat Daat de Hey Hassadim.
()
123. Why is Upper AVI not regarded as the Rosh of ZON, but as
YESHSUT?
You already know the division of Bina and Tvuna into two halves,
GAR and ZAT. The GAR are Behinat Bina before she emanated the
ZON, at which time she is only Ohr de Hassadim. This is Behinat
Upper AVI.

--- PAGE 597 ---
The ZAT, which is Behinat Bina after she emanated the ZON, has
He’arat Hochma too, called Tvuna, and this is Behinat YESHSUT.
Now you can understand that Upper AVI are not at all designated to be
Rosh de ZON.
Moreover, the whole essence of the Upper AVI, is because they are
Behinat Bina before they emanated the ZON. They have only Ohr de
Hassadim, which is not at all from the Behinat ZON, which are only
Behinat Hassadim in He’arat Hochma.
Hence, only the YESHSUT, which are Behinat ZAT de AVI that
emanated the ZON de Ohr Yashar, and have He’arat Hochma in them,
which is the entire degree of ZA, are always considered Rosh de ZON
in all the Partzufim.
()
124. Why did the Achoraim de AVI not fall to BYA like the ZON?
This is because the cancellation de Achoraim de AVI was not due to a
mixture of the Dinim, which are the Behina Dalet, but only because of
the Hizdakchut of the Masach. Hence, they were not entirely
disqualified from Behinat Atzilut, but were only cancelled temporarily.
In other words, as long as they have no one to dispense to, they are
cancelled. But when the Kelim return from BYA to Atzilut, they too
return to bestow upon them as in the beginning. For this reason they
are only in Behinat temporary cancellation, not in Behinat, breaking
and death like the seven Melachim.
Behinat He’arat Achor be Achor de AVI too reached the above-
mentioned Achoraim, called Hitpashtut Gimel Kavim KHB to the
Achoraim that stand in HGT.
(Item 14)
125. Why did the Achoraim de AVI fall to Behinat Guf?
Because all these four Komot that emerged in the Gadlut de AVI came
out on the MAN de Vav ו and Nekuda de Yesod AK, which are the
general Behinat ZON and Behinat Guf, and are not at all from Behinat
AVI.

--- PAGE 598 ---
Instead, when they were incorporated in the Zivug de AVI itself and
operated there in Behinat MAN, extending He’arat Hochma for the
seven Melachim, they had a place in Rosh de AVI. However, after the
Zivug on them has been cancelled, they no longer have a place there,
and they must return to their place in the Guf.
(Item 14)
126. Where did the Hitpashtut KHB to the new Kelim de HGT come
from?
The four Komot emerged in AVI de Gadlut and in NHY de Keter and
served them as Mochin, which were in Behinat KHB de Nekudim,
corrected in Tikun Kavim. Now, after they were cancelled and fell to
their Behinat Gufim, they drew the Behinat Tikun Kavim de KHB with
them into the places they fell to, and these Achoraim too were
corrected in Tikun Kavim like the KHB.
()
127. Why were the Achoraim de AVI made into Behinat MAN that the
ZON raise to them?
Because those Achoraim that fell from AVI are the Behinat MAN that
AVI received from the Yesod de AK. Hence, once they have fallen to
the place of ZON, the ZON raises them back to Behinat MAN to AVI
from all the Komot in them, which are NRNHY.
()
128. Which Behinot Kelim of the Seven Melachim fell to Yetzira and
Assiya?
The Behinat Toch in all the Kelim fell to Yetzira, and the Behinat Sof
in all the Kelim fell to Assiya.
()
129. Where did the Orot of the Seven Melachim leave their Reshimot
after their departure?
The Reshimot de Dalet Melachim DHGT first descended to Behinat
NHYM de Atzilut. Afterwards they clothed in the new Kelim DHGT

--- PAGE 599 ---
that were made of the Achoraim de AVI de Nekudim. The Reshimo de
Dalet Melachim TNHYM first rose to the new Kelim de DHGT, and
then descended from there and clothed the new Kelim de Tifferet,
Netzah, and Hod, made of the Achoraim de YESHSUT.
()
130. Why where the Reshimot arranged in NHYM de Atzilut in an
opposite order, Daat below, and Tifferet above all?
During the Hitlabshut of the Orot in the Kelim, the more Av is
considered more important and more Elyon. It is inverted after the
Histalkut Orot from the Kelim, as then the more Av is lower.
Thus, since the Daat was the highest during the Hitlabshut, you find
that during the Histalkut, he is the lowest. Hesed, whose Aviut is less
than him, is above it, and the Gevura, whose Aviut is less than Hesed,
is above Hesed. The Tifferet, whose Aviut is less than all, is the
highest.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 19)
131. Why did the Reshimot of the Dalet Melachim DHGT fell to NHYM
de Atzilut?
Their Kelim broke and fell to BYA. Hence, they came as close to them
as they could in order to illuminate them in Behinat Tagin over the
Otiot.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 20)
132. Why did the Reshimo of the Upper third of Tifferet remain in its
place unchanged?
Its Kli, which is the upper third of Tifferet, fell only to Behinat from
the Chazeh downward. Hence, it did not have to descend at all, as it
was cleaved to it from its place in Behinat Tagin over it.
(Item 28)
133. Which change was there in the Reshimo of the two lower thirds of
Tifferet?

--- PAGE 600 ---
It did not stay in its place, but rose and clothed the new Kli of the
upper third of Tifferet that was made of the Achoraim de AVI.
Regardless, it is not a great change since in the end, they are two
halves of one Kli.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 30)
134. Who brought the Reshimot back to the new Kelim DHGT de
Atzilut?
The Rosh de YESHSUT clothed the entire place of the four Melachim
DHGT from below upward. It is Behinat Hitpashtut Bet, whose
conduct is to fill the empty Kelim and the Reshimot of the Guf de
Elyon.
Hence, he illuminated to these Reshimot of the four Melachim of
DHGT, which are Behinat its Guf of the Elyon, meaning de AVI, and
drew them to their place in the new Kelim in order to clothe them.
()
135. Why did the four Melachim DHGT descend to GAR de Beria,
Yetzira, and Assiya?
The Melachim of DHGT are Behinot GAR de ZAT, and are therefore
ascribed to GAR de BYA.
()
136. Why were there two falls in the Melachim of DHGT, one for GAR
de BYA, and another for NHYM de BYA?
When the Reshimot were close to them in Behinat Tagin over the Otiot
in the place of NHYM de Atzilut, they could sustain themselves in
GAR de BYA since they too are Behinat GAR de ZAT. However, after
the Reshimot had distanced and clothed in the new Kelim and in the
Rosh de YESHSUT, their He’arah stopped from the Kelim. For this
reason they fell to the last level de BYA, which is the place of NHYM
de BYA.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 25)

--- PAGE 601 ---
137. Who magnified the Kli de Keter up to the place of Chazeh de
Tifferet?
The Achoraim de Daat de AVI that was clothed in NHY de Keter de
Nekudim expanded in the middle line and became the new Kelim de
Daat and Tifferet.
138. Who complemented the new Kli de Tifferet from the place of the
Chazeh to its Sium?
Behinat Achoraim that fell from the Rosh de YESHSUT, which fell
from the place from the Chazeh up to the place from the Chazeh
downward. They were corrected in Behinat middle line through the
He’arat Rosh from the Zivug of the two Ketarim in Daat and
increased the Kli de Tifferet through its Sium.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 32)
139. How do the new Kelim DHGT come from Hitpashtut KHB de
Nekudim?
These Achoraim de AVI come from Behinat AVI and NHY de Keter,
being KHB de Nekudim, corrected in Tikun Kavim at their very
creation in Behinat Achor be Achor through the luminescence of the
Upper Ima. Hence, after they’d fallen from the Rosh to the place of
DHGT, they are also given from Behinat Achor be Achor de AVI that
were not cancelled, and their Tikun Kavim extends on the Achoraim
too.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 22)
140. How was the Zivug of the two Ketarim de Daat made after the
breaking of the four Melachim NHYM?
After Kli Malchut was also broken and the Masach de YESHSUT
purified from every Behinat Aviut that it had, you find that it rose and
incorporated in the Zivug of Rosh de YESHSUT. Behina Bet
disappeared, being the last Behina, and only the Aviut de Behina Aleph
remained. Hence, only Komat ZA emerged on it, which is Behinat
Hesed and Gevura, called Bet Ketarim de Daat.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 32)

--- PAGE 602 ---
141. Who reared the Kelim of the new Tifferet, Netzah, and Hod?
The new Kelim Tifferet, Netzah, and Hod, were made through the
Achoraim de YESHSUT that fell to the place of TNHY, and through
their clothing in the new Rosh.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 32)
142. What are the causes for the elicitation of the Katnut and Gadlut de
AVI de Nekudim?
The Katnut de Nekudim until Behinat Achor be Achor de AVI emerged
from the Reshimot de SAG, contained in the Masach. Also, the Gadlut
de Nekudim and the seven Melachim emerged from the Reshimot de
NHY de AK contained in the Masach.
()
143. Who raised MAN for the Upper Zivug AB SAG for the Gadlut de
AVI?
MA and BON de AK, which are NHY de AK, rose to MAN to the Upper
AB SAG, mated Panim be Panim, and lowered the Hey Tata’a from
the Eynaim, returning all the AHPs to their preliminary degree.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 4)
144. What did the inner Orot that came out through the Tabur and the
Yesod de AK do?
The new Ohr that fissured the Parsa and came out through the Tabur,
lowered the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim de Keter, and AVI returned to
the Rosh and came to a state of Panim be Achor. The Ohr that came
out through Yesod de AK to AVI became MAN for AVI, brought them
to a state of Panim be Panim, and elicited the Seven Melachim de
Nekudim.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 5)
145. Why did the GAR and ZAT de Eser Sefirot de Nekudim emerge at
once?
When GAR de Nekudim emerged, AVI were in Behinat Achor be
Achor, where there is no Hitpashtut to the Guf from them. For this

--- PAGE 603 ---
reason they needed the Zivug de AB SAG and the MAN de Yesod de
AK, and then they came in a Zivug Panim be Panim and expanded to
their Gufim, which are the seven Melachim.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 6)
146. Since the Seven Melachim do not belong to AVI, which are only
from Behina Bet, they had to emerge from NHY de AK.
This is because according to the order of degrees, Komat ZA emerges
only from AVI, which are Behinat SAG, and not from NHY de AK,
which is Behinat Galgalta.
()
147. What is the essence of the Achoraim de AVI that fell?
They are the Behinat Vav ו and Nekuda de Yesod de AK, meaning the
general ZON, and all the Reshimot of the four Komot de Gadlut with
their dresses.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 15)
148. Where is the place of the fall of each of the four Komot de
Achoraim de AVI?
Each Rosh of the four Komot fell into Behinat its own Guf.
(Histaklut Pnimit item 15)
150. What are the four reasons that preceded the Zivug AVI Panim be
Panim?
• The first is the ascent of MAN from NHY de AK to the Upper AB
SAG, which mates them together.
• The second, a new Ohr that came out of Zivug de AB SAG that
fissured the Parsa.
• The third, the descent of that new Ohr below Tabur and its exit to
Keter de Nekudim, which lowered the Hey Tata’a from Eynaim de
Keter to the Peh de Nekudim.
• The fourth, the He’arah that emerged through the Yesod to AVI and
became a MAN to the seven Melachim, which returned AVI Panim

--- PAGE 604 ---
be Panim.
(Cause and Consequence item 2)
149. What are the twelve actions accustomed in every Melech of the
four Melachim DHGT?
• The first is the Zivug on the Masach that measures the height of the
Koma according to the place of the Hey Tata’a.
• The second is the Zivug de AVI Panim be Panim, measuring the
He’arat Hochma for the ZON.
• The third, the Koma that elicits from below upward in AVI
themselves.
• The fourth, the Koma that expands from above downward into
Behinat Guf, called Melech.
• The fifth, the Histalkut Ohr to its Shoresh because of the mixture
of the Behina Dalet in the Kli.
• The sixth is the fall of the Kli to the GAR de BYA.
• The seventh is the remaining of the Reshimo of the Orot that
departed.
• The eighth is the descent of the Reshimo to NHYM de Atzilut in
Behinat Tagin over the Otiot.
• The ninth is the fall of the Achoraim de AVI to the places of their
Gufim.
• The tenth is Tikun Kavim, made in these Achoraim de AVI that fell.
• The eleventh is the ascent of the Reshimot from NHYM de Atzilut
to the new Kelim de HGT that were made of the Achoraim de AVI.
• The twelfth is the descent of the Kelim from GAR de BYA as well,
to NHYM de BYA.
(Cause and Consequence item 4)
150. What are the four reasons that preceded the Zivug Panim be
Panim de YESHSUT?
• The first is the ascent of the Masach that purified to AVI.

--- PAGE 605 ---
• The second is its Hitkalelut in Zivug Achor be Achor de AVI.
• The third is Hitkalelut in Zivug Panim be Achor de AVI.
• The fourth is Hitkalelut in Zivug Panim be Panim de AVI.
(Cause and Consequence item 7)
151. What are the eleven operations that were in each of the four
Melachim TNHYM?
• The first is the Zivug on the Masach that measures the height of the
Koma according to the place of Tifferet.
• The second is the Zivug de Panim be Panim that measures the
He’arat Hochma for the ZON.
• The third is the Koma from below upward.
• The fourth is the Koma from above downward in the Guf, called
Melech.
• The fifth is the Histalkut of the Ohr.
• The sixth is the fall of the Kli to BYA.
• The seventh is the Reshimot that remained of the Orot.
• The eighth is the ascent of the Reshimot to the new Kelim de
Achoraim de AVI.
• The ninth is the fall of the Achoraim de YESHSUT into Behinat
Guf.
• The tenth is the Tikun Kavim in the Achoraim de YESHSUT that
were thus made into Kelim de Tifferet, Netzah, and Hod, to the
new Kelim from the Achoraim de YESHSUT.
(Cause and Consequence item 17)
152. Why did the ascent of Malchut in the Zivug of the two Ketarim de
Daat tie all the VAK?
The ascent of Malchut means the ascent of the Masach after its
Hizdakchut from all the Aviut de Guf in it, to the Masach de Rosh de
YESHSUT. A new Zivug was made on it in Koma de Behina Aleph,
and only the Behinat from below upward did not come out in it. It

--- PAGE 606 ---
corrected the Achoraim de YESHSUT in Kavim and completed the
Tikun Kavim in all the VAK.
()
153. What are the 103 operations that emerged from one another in an
order of cause and effect from after the situation de Achor be
Achor de AVI until after Tikun Kavim of the new Kelim Tifferet,
Netzah, and Hod, made after the breaking of the vessels?
This answer of cause and consequence is a continuation of the answer
of cause and consequence presented in Lesson Six, answer 164. It
explained there the necessity of cause and consequence from
Tzimtzum Aleph down to the Katnut de AVI de Nekudim in a state of
Achor be Achor.
Here we shall continue to explain from the Gadlut de AVI de Nekudim
to the Tikun Kavim of the new Kelim, namely the two lower thirds of
Tifferet and NH that emerged after the end of the breaking of the
vessels. We shall explain how there are a 103 actions here, and how
they emerge from one another in complete necessity of cause and
consequence.
You already know that in general, the Orot are divided by two
discernments: Ohr Hochma and Ohr Hassadim. Both contain five
Behinot. The five Behinot de Ohr Hochma are called KHB ZON, and
the five Behinot de Ohr Hassadim are called HGT NH.
The two above discernments emerged and hung from AK ha Pnimi
until they came to Komat MA and BON. Three Partzufim emerged
from AK in the beginning: AB, SAG, MA, and BON, until AVI de
Nekudim, that were Achor be Achor. All these are from the first
discernment de Ohr Hochma.
Afterwards, three Partzufim came out similarly in the second
discernment from the Ohr de Hassadim. These are AB, SAG, MA, and
BON, called AVI, YESHSUT, and Daat. All of them came out in Olam
ha Nekudim, as is written in this part, and from them we shall begin
our explanation here.

--- PAGE 607 ---
1) The first cause of the elicitation of the three Partzufim in Behinat Ohr
de Hassadim are the Reshimot de MA and BON de AK that rose to
MAN to the Upper AB SAG, and mated Panim be Panim (see Cause
and Consequence item 1).
b) Through this Zivug, a new Ohr emerged and fissured the Parsa.
c) That new Ohr fissured the Parsa and came out through the Tabur
to the Keter de Nekudim, and lowered the Hey Tata’a from the
Eynaim de Keter to the general Peh de Nekudim. It returned AVI to
the Rosh, and they obtained their GAR and thus came to a state of
Panim be Achor.
d) This new Ohr descended and illuminated to the NHY de AK. At
that time Yesod illuminated the Vav ו and Nekuda to AVI in Behinat
MAN, causing them the state of Panim be Panim.
Thus, the two operations, the third and the fourth, join Panim be
Panim. Panim de Abba is a resultant of the third act, meaning of the
new Ohr that illuminated through the Tabur, and Panim de Ima
extends from the new Ohr that illuminated the MAN through the
Yesod, causing the Panim de Ima.
It follows, that these four operations stem from one another and cause
one another: The fourth and the third, which the two situations Panim
be Panim and Panim be Achor, extend from the new Ohr that fissured
the Parsa, which is the second operation, extended from the Zivug de
AB SAG, which is the first operation. The cause for this Zivug is the
raising of MAN from NHY de AK.
You must remember that the cause for raising MAN de NHY de AK is
the Hizdakchut of the Masach de Guf de SAG that consisted of two
kinds of Reshimot: Reshimot de NHY de AK, and its own Reshimo,
meaning de SAG.
After it purified from its entire Aviut, it is considered to have risen and
mingled in the Rosh SAG. Thus, first there was a Zivug on the
Reshimot de SAG, contained in the Masach. From this Zivug rose the
Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, and the AHP of all the degrees were

--- PAGE 608 ---
expelled outside the degree. Ultimately, the AHP de Eser Sefirot de
Sium, meaning Bina, ZA, and Malchut de Eser Sefirot de NHY de AK,
were expelled below the Kav of Ein Sof to the place of BYA.
This is the last consequence, in which we ended the answer of Cause
and Consequence in Part Six. It is also the last operations that hung
down from the Hey Partzufim GASMB, from the discernment of Ohr
Hochma.
After that the Zivug of the Upper AB and SAG was made on the
Reshimot contained in the Masach from the NHY de AK that returns
and brings the AHP of all the rejected degrees back. This is because a
new Ohr, elicited from Zivug de AB SAG, lowers the Hey Tata’a from
the Eynaim to its Peh as in the beginning, and thus fissures and
cancels the Gevul de Parsa, returning the BYA to Atzilut.
There are two things you must learn here:
• That the two above Zivugim, Katnut and Gadlut, contradict one
another though they are both resultants of the same cause, being
the Hizdakchut Masach de SAG that raised the two kinds of
Reshimot to the Zivug.
The first Zivug de Katnut, which emerged on the Reshimot de SAG,
raised the Hey Tata’a to the Eynaim and expelled the AHP from all the
degrees. The second Zivug de Gadlut, made on the Reshimot de NHY
de AK, lowered the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim once more and
returned the AHP to their degree. It follows, that they contradict each
other.
• We must learn here that between the above two Zivugim, there is
the intersection of the two above kinds of Hey Partzufim, from a
discernment of Ohr Hochma, and from a discernment of Ohr
Hassadim.
The Zivug that emerged from the Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey Eynaim on
the Reshimot de SAG is the last Partzuf de Hey Partzufim GASMB
from the discernment of Ohr Hochma. The second Zivug de Gadlut
that emerged on the Reshimot de NHY de AK through the Zivug de AB

--- PAGE 609 ---
SAG is the beginning for the Hey Partzufim GASMB from the
discernment of Ohr de Hassadim.
From here on the Partzufim are discerned as primarily Ohr Hassadim,
though there is only He’arat GAR in them, as the ASMB de Nekudim
called AVI, YESHSUT, and Daat, were explained, which are Behinat
NRNHY de ZA. Thus, the intersection of the two kinds of Hey
Partzufim is found between the two above Zivugim.
1) Now we have thoroughly explained the four necessary operations to
bring AVI to a state of Panim be Panim. These are raising MAN from
NHY de AK to Zivug AB SAG and the new Ohr that fissured the Parsa,
which came out of the Zivug, and the elicitation of the new Ohr
through the Tabur. It lowered the Hey Tata’a and brought AVI to a
state of Panim be Achor, and its He’arah elicited through the Yesod in
Behinat MAN that brought AVI to a state of Panim be Panim.
Now we shall explain the nine operations extending from that Zivug
Panim be Panim, how they result from one another by way of cause
and consequence. Also, all these nine operations were made in Melech
ha Daat from the beginning of its making in the Rosh de AVI up to the
cancellation of its Zivug.
There are two principal factors here, connecting into one action. The
first of them measures the height of the Koma, and the second
measures and receives only the He’arat Hochma.
The first factor is the measure of the Aviut in the Masach, evaluated
according to the place of the Hey Tata’a. Here, it is Behina Dalet de
Hitlabshut and Behina Gimel de Aviut, eliciting Eser Sefirot from
below upward in Komat Keter. It is so because the place of the Hey
Tata’a is in the general Peh de Rosh de Nekudim. This element is
affected by the third action, the lowering of the Hey Tata’a from the
Eynaim.
The sixth operation is the second cause, which is the return of the
Panim de Ima that depends on the MAN, which is the Behinat general
ZON, rooted in the Vav ו and Nekuda that received from Yesod de AK.

--- PAGE 610 ---
Thus, she does not receive from the Panim de Abba more than the
measure of He’arat Hochma de ZON de Ohr Yashar that receives
from Bina de Ohr Yashar. This measure is called Halon (lit. Window).
Also, that second factor results from the fourth operation, which is the
MAN de Yesod de AK.
Thus, the fifth operation, which is the measurement of the Koma, and
the sixth operation, which is the measure of the He’arat Hochma, are
caused by operations three and four.
Eser Sefirot de Rosh in AVI from below upward called Daat de AVI
extend from the above fifth and sixth operations, whose Atzmut is Hey
Hassadim and Hey Gevurot, but in He’arat Hochma. Its Koma is
measured like ZON de Komat Keter, since the fifth operation
measures Komat Keter, and the sixth operation limits it to He’arat
Hochma de ZON de Keter.
This is the seventh operation, meaning the Eser Sefirot de Rosh in
Komat ZON de Keter. Also, the Malchut of this Rosh expands in the
full measure of Koma that is in the Rosh, descends and clothes Melech
ha Daat, and this is the eighth operation, caused by the sixth
operation.
Two operations extend from the eighth operation, being Komat Keter
that clothed in Melech ha Daat: the ninth - the Histalkut Ohr, and the
tenth - the death of the Kli and its fall to BYA. It is so because had that
Koma been received in the Kli de Daat, it would have returned the
BYA to Atzilut, as the Zivug came out on the Hey Tata’a that
descended to her place as in the beginning, before Tzimtzum Bet, since
the Parsa had already been fissured.
However, because of the mixture of the Sigim in the Kli the Ohr could
not fully clothe in it. This is so because when the Ohr encountered the
Behina Dalet that was mixed in it, it immediately departed to its
Shoresh.
Thus, the Kli fell to the Separated BYA. Because there was the
completion of BYA in it, it had to connect them to Atzilut. Since it did

--- PAGE 611 ---
not connect them because the Ohr departed from it, it remained in the
Separated BYA itself.
Therefore, you see that the measure of the Ohr itself, which is the
eighth operation, caused its departure, as the Kli could not receive it,
and this caused its fall to BYA. Because its measure would have placed
it in the place of BYA in order to connect them to Atzilut, it thus caused
the Kli itself to separate from Atzilut and fall to BYA, which is death to
the Kli.
Two operations extend from the tenth and ninth operations, which are
the Histalkut of the Ohr and the fall to BYA. The eleventh is the
remaining of the Reshimot from the Ohr that departed, as that is the
conduct of the Orot, that after their departure, they leave Reshimot
after them in the place where they were. Thus, the eleventh operation
is a consequence of the ninth.
The twelfth operation, which is the descent of the Reshimot to the
bottom of Atzilut as much as they could, is a resultant of the tenth
operation, which is their fall to BYA. For this reason they could not be
inside the Kelim as they usually are, and were forced for shine on
them from above, as Tagin. Hence, they descended to the bottom of
Atzilut to come as close as they could to their Behina, to revive them.
The thirteenth operation is the cancellation of the Zivug in the Rosh de
AVI and the fall of the Reshimot and the MAN to the place of its Guf. It
is called “the cancellation of Achoraim de AVI,” and it too is a result
of the tenth operation.
This is so because when the Kli broke and fell to BYA, her Masach
was cancelled and no longer received to the Orot de Rosh. It is known
that any return of Panim de Ima was not at all for herself, but for the
connection de Ohr Yashar that she has to administer He’arat Hochma
to the ZON.
Hence, once the receiver broke, this whole Zivug was cancelled since
all she wants for herself is Hassadim, by way of “because He
delighteth in mercy.”

--- PAGE 612 ---
Thus we have explained how the eleventh operation, being the leaving
of the Reshimot, results from the ninth, which is the Histalkut of the
Ohr, and how the two operations, the twelfth and the thirteenth, result
from the tenth operation, which is the fall to BYA.
2) From the thirteenth operation, which is the cancellation of the Zivug
from the Masach in the Rosh de Komat Keter, the Hey Tata’a leaves
the place of the Peh and rises to the Hotem. This is because the
Histalkut is executed gradually, from Behina Dalet to Behina Gimel,
and from Behina Gimel to Behina Bet etc. until it leaves entirely.
You find, that when the Zivug de Behina Dalet leaves, which is the
Behinat Hey Tata’a in the place of the Peh, she rises to Behina Gimel,
which is the Hotem. Hence, two new operations are educed here,
meaning the factors implemented in the Hey Partzufim de Hassadim:
the first, to measure the Koma, resulting from the above thirteenth
operation, and this is the fourteenth operation.
The second is to extend He’arat Hochma, extending from the remains
of the MAN de Yesod AK. It is so because in the annulment of the
Zivug de Komat Keter, only one part of the MAN ascribed to Komat
Keter was cancelled, while the remnants still remained in Ima. They
had returned her Panim be Panim in the new Zivug on the Masach de
Behina Gimel, and this is the fifteenth operation.
Thus we have seen how the three operations, the fourteenth - the
measurement of the Koma de Behina Gimel, the fifteenth - the
Hamshacha of He’arat Hochma from Koma de Behina Gimel, both
result from the thirteenth operation, being the annulment of the Zivug
de Komat Keter. This is because they are the remnants that remained
in the Aviut and in the MAN, after the annulment of Komat Keter.
The Eser Sefirot from below upward, called Guf de Abba, extend from
the two operations fourteenth and fifteenth. The fourteenth measures
the Komat Hochma in it, and the fifteenth extends the He’arat
Hochma from this Koma, and this is the sixteenth operation.
Also, the Eser Sefirot extend from above downward to the Guf, called
Melech ha Hesed, and this is the seventeenth, a resultant of the

--- PAGE 613 ---
sixteenth.
Two operations of Histalkut Ohr from the Kli de Hesed extend from
the seventeenth operation. This is the eighteenth operation, and its fall
to BYA is the nineteenth operation, as we have explained above in the
ninth and tenth operations.
The twentieth operation, which is the leaving of the Reshimo, extends
from the eighteenth operation, which is the Histalkut of the Ohr, as
this is the nature of any departing Ohr.
Also, two operations result from the nineteenth operation. These are
the 21st operation, being the descent of the Reshimot to the bottom of
Atzilut, and the 22nd operation, the cancellation of the Zivug de Rosh
de Komat Hochma. It is in the same manner as in the twelfth and
thirteenth operations that result from the tenth operation.
3) Two operations stem from the 22nd operation, being the cancellation
of the Komat Hochma: the 23rd, which is a new cause for Komat Bina.
This is because due to the cancellation of the Zivug from the Hotem,
the Hey Tata’a rose to the Awzen, which is Behina Bet. The 24th is a
Hamshacha of He’arat Hochma from Komat Bina, which is the
second factor, as we have said in the fourteenth and the fifteenth that
extend from the thirteenth.
The Eser Sefirot from below upward in AVI, called Guf de Ima, result
from the two operations, the 23rd and the 24th. This is the 25th
operation, where the 23rd measures the Koma de Bina, and the 24th
extends the He’arat Hochma from this Koma.
The Hitpashtut to the Guf extends from the 25th operation, from the
Malchut in her, the Melech ha Gevura, and this is the 26th operation.
The Histalkut Ohr extends from the 26th operation. This is the 27th
operation, and the fall of the Kli to BYA, which is the 28th operation,
similar to the eighteenth and nineteenth that result from the
seventeenth.

--- PAGE 614 ---
The 29th operation, which is the leaving of the Reshimo, stems from
the 27th operation, which is the Histalkut Ohr.
Two operations stem from the 28th operation, which is the fall to BYA.
These are the descent of the Reshimo to the bottom of Atzilut, which is
the 30th operation, and the cancellation of the Zivug de Komat Bina,
which is the 31st operation, similar to operations twelve and thirteen
that result from the tenth.
4) Two operations, the 32nd and the 33rd, are caused by the 31st
operation, which is the cancellation of the Zivug de Komat Bina.
These are the measurement of Komat ZA, as after the Zivug was
cancelled from the Awzen, the Hey Tata’a rose to the Eynaim, which is
Behina Aleph once more, and this is the 32nd operation, extending this
He’arah to ZON, which is the 33rd operation.
The Eser Sefirot de Komat ZA from below upward in AVI, called
Yesodot de AK, result from the two operations, the 32nd and the 33rd,
and this is the 34th operation.
From the 34th operation stem the Hitpashtut to the Melech of the
upper third of Tifferet, and this is the 35th operation. From that results
the 36th operation, being the Histalkut Ohr, as well as the 37th, which
is its fall to Behinat two lower thirds of Tifferet. This is similar to the
two operations, the ninth and the tenth, that result from the eighth.
The resultant of the 36th operation, which is the Histalkut Ohr, is the
leaving of the Reshimo, being the 38th operation.
From the 37th operation, which is the fall to BYA, extends from the
cancellation of the Zivug de Behina Aleph. This is because through the
breaking of the Kli, the receiver is cancelled, and the Zivug de Rosh
stops, as it has no one to bestow to, and this is the 39th operation.
One operation is missing here, meaning the descent of the Reshimo,
since the Reshimo remains in its place, as its Kli did not fall to BYA
now, but to its two bottom thirds from the Chazeh downward, and the

--- PAGE 615 ---
Reshimo can shine to it from its place form the Chazeh upward,
without any descent.
YESHSUT and the Melachim of TNHYM
5) The ascent of the Masach de Guf with the Reshimot in it to AVI stems
from the 39th operation, being the cancellation of the Zivug de Behina
Aleph because of the Hizdakchut of the Masach. This is so because
after the Masach has been purified from the Aviut de Behina Aleph to
the Shoresh, and after all its Aviut de Guf has stopped from it entirely,
it is considered that it rose and was incorporated in the Masach of
Rosh de AVI (see Cause and Consequence item 5). This is the 40th
operation.
The 41st operation, which is its Hitkalelut and renewal there in Zivug
Achor be Achor that remains in AVI, stems from the 40th operation,
being the ascent of the Masach to AVI.
From the 41st operation stems the 42nd operation, being the elicitation
of the Zivug de Panim be Achor in AVI on the Masach and the
Reshimot de YESHSUT contained in it. This is so because through the
renewal of the Aviut in the Masach through its Hitkalelut in Zivug
Achor be Achor de AVI, the Aviut returned over all the Reshimot
contained in the Masach, except the last Behina, Behina Gimel, as
only Behinat Hitlabshut was left of it.
Hence, a new Zivug over the Aviut de Behina Gimel de Hitlabshut and
Behina Bet de Aviut was made there in the Hitkalelut in AVI. This is
considered that the Hey Tata’a in AVI descended once more from
Eynaim to Behinat Awzen and Hotem, contained in one another, and
Komat Hochma came out there, which is the Behinat Panim de Abba.
However, Ima still does not return her Panim to Abba without MAN.
For this reason they have now come to a state of Panim be Achor.
The 42nd operation, which is Panim be Achor, causes the 43rd
operation, which is the state of Panim be Panim. This is because once
the Reshimot contained in the Masach have thickened, they have

--- PAGE 616 ---
become MAN for Ima too, as these Reshimot are from ZON, that
always awaken MAN in Ima. For this reason she has returned Panim
be Panim with Abba.
The 43rd operation, namely the state of Panim be Panim, causes the
44th operation, being the descent of the above Komat Panim be Panim
that emerged in AVI to the Guf de Nekudim, to the place of Chazeh in
Tifferet.
This is so because once the Aviut in the Masach with the Reshimot
contained in it was recognized, it appeared in it that it is Behinat
Masach de Guf, different from the Behinat Rosh. For this reason it
descended to its Shoresh, from which it ascended, which is the place
of the Chazeh.
It educed Koma Eser Sefirot there from the Chazeh upward to the Peh
de AVI, as the measure of its Koma that it had in the Hitkalelut in AVI.
6) Four simultaneous operations, meaning up to the 48th operation, stem
from the 44th operation, which is the descent of the Koma to the place
from the Chazeh up to the Peh, called YESHSUT.
This operation, namely the clothing of YESHSUT on the place of Guf
de Nekudim from the Chazeh to the Peh de Rosh de AVI where the
four Komot de AVI fell after their Zivug has been cancelled (Cause and
Consequence item 3), is called, “the fall of the Achoraim de AVI”.
This, in turn, induced a Hitpashtut of Gimel Kavim de KHB in these
Achoraim, from which four new Kelim de DHGT were erected in the
place of Rosh de YESHSUT.
The Rosh de YESHSUT clothed them as any Rosh de Partzuf Tachton
clothes the Guf de Elyon: A Kli de Hesed was made in the right line, a
Kli de Gevura in the left line, and a Kli de Tifferet in the middle line,
up to the Chazeh, meaning up to the place where the Rosh de
YESHSUT begins to clothe.
By that, operations 45, 46, 47, and 48, were made. The 45th is the new
Kli de Daat. The 46th is the new Kli de Hesed on the right. Operation

--- PAGE 617 ---
47 is the new Kli de Gevura on the left. Operation 48 is the new Kli de
Tifferet in the middle up to the Chazeh, meaning only the upper third.
Four other operations result from these four operations: 49th, 50th,
51st, and 52nd. The 45th operation, which is the new Kli de Daat,
causes the ascent of the Reshimo de Daat that was in the place of
Malchut de Atzilut, and has now risen to the new Kli that was made in
her place, and this is the 49th operation.
From the 46th operation extends the ascent of the Reshimo de Hesed to
the new Kli de Hesed, and this is the 50th operation. From the 47th
operation extends the ascent of the Reshimo de Gevura to the new Kli
de Gevura, and this is the 51st operation. In addition, from the 48th
operation stems the Hitlabshut of the Reshimo de Tifferet in the Kli de
Tifferet, and this is the 52nd operation.
Three other operations stem from them, the 53rd, 54th, and 55th. The
descent of the Kli de Daat that was in Daat de BYA stems from the
49th operation, namely the Hitlabshut Reshimo de Daat in the new Kli
de Daat.
Now, because of the removal of the Reshimo from it, she descended to
the bottom of BYA, meaning to their Malchut, and this is the 53rd
operation.
The 54th operation is the descent of the Reshimo de Hesed from Bina
de BYA to Yesod de BYA, resulting from the 50th operation, and the
descent of the Reshimo de Gevura from Hochma de BYA to NH de
BYA, which is the 55th operation, stems from the 51st operation.
7) Nine operations stem from the 44th operation, which is the Rosh of
YESHSUT, from the 56th operation to the 64th operation, until that
Koma is completely revoked. Two elements were extended there in the
beginning. The first is that which measures the height of the Koma,
extending from the Hey Tata’a that descended into Behina Gimel. This
is the 56th operation. The second is the measure of He’arat Hochma
from this Koma, being the 57th operation.

--- PAGE 618 ---
The measure of the Koma called Histaklut Eynaim de YESHSUT,
which is Behinat HG in He’arat Hochma extends from the two
operations, the 56th and the 57th, and this is the 58th operation.
A Hitpashtut to the Guf, to the Melech of the two lower thirds of
Tifferet extends from the 58th operation, from the Malchut in it, and
this is the 59th operation.
Two operations extend from the 59th operation: one is the Histalkut
Ohr from the Kli, being the 60th operation, and the second is their fall
to BYA. It is similar to the above explanation regarding the two
operations, the ninth and the tenth, that extend from the eighth.
The leaving of the Reshimo, which is the 62nd operation, extends from
the 60th operation, which is the Histalkut Ohr. It is so because the
nature of the Ohr is to leave a Reshimo after its departure.
Two operations result from the 61st operation, which is their fall to
BYA: the ascent of the Reshimot and their Hitlabshut in the new Kelim,
since they cannot clothe in their Kelim as they have fallen to BYA.
This is the 63rd operation.
The second is the cancellation of the Zivug and the fall of the Koma to
the place of her Guf, called “the fall of the Achoraim de YESHSUT”. It
is so because after the Kelim were broken, its Masach purified, the
Zivug of the Rosh was cancelled, and the Koma de Rosh fell to BYA.
This is the 64th operation.
8) Two operations, the 65th and the 66th, stem from the 64th operation,
which is the cancellation of the Zivug de Rosh de YESHSUT that was
in Komat Hochma. Because the Zivug de Behina Gimel was cancelled
and only the Aviut de Behina Bet remained in the Masach, the Zivug
came out on it in Komat Bina, and this is the 65th operation.
The second is the Hamshacha of He’arat Hochma from this Koma,
and this is the 66th operation. It is in the same manner that operations
twelve and thirteen stem from the tenth.

--- PAGE 619 ---
The Eser Sefirot from below upward in Komat Bina, called Guf de
YESHSUT, stem from the two operations, the 65th and the 66th, and
this is the 67th operation. The 65th measures the Koma of Bina, and the
66th extends the He’arat Hochma.
The Hitpashtut to the Guf, to Melech NH results from the 67th
operation, from the Malchut, and this is the 68th operation.
From the 68th operation extends the Histalkut Ohr, which is the 69th
operation, and the fall to BYA, which is the 70th operation. It is in the
same manner as the ninth and the tenth result from the eighth.
The 71st operation, which is the leaving of the Reshimo, results from
the 69th operation, which is the Histalkut of the Ohr. Also, two
operations stem from the 70th operation, which is the fall to BYA: the
ascent of the Reshimo to the new Kli de Gevura, being the 72nd
operation, and the annulment of the Zivug de Komat Bina of the Rosh
and its fall to the Guf, which is the 73rd operation.
9) Two operations stem from the 73rd operation, which is the annulment
of the Zivug de Komat Bina: it causes Komat ZA, which is the 74th
operation. This is so because after the annulment of Aviut de Behina
Bet, there still remains Aviut de Behina Aleph. The second is
Hamshacha of He’arat Hochma from this Koma, which is the 75th
operation.
The 76th operation is the Eser Sefirot from below upward in Komat
ZA, called Yesodot de YESHSUT, caused by the two operations, the
74th and the 75th.
The 77th operation is the Hitpashtut to the Guf, to Melech ha Yesod,
resulting from the 76th operation, form the Malchut in it.
Two operations stem from the 77th operation: the first is the Histalkut
Ohr from the Kli de Yesod. This is the 78th operation. The second is
the fall to BYA, and this is the 79th operation.

--- PAGE 620 ---
From the 78th operation, being the Histalkut Ohr, stems the leaving of
the Reshimo, which is the 80th operation. In addition, two operations
stem from the 76th operation, which is the fall to BYA: The first is the
ascent of the Reshimo and its Hitlabshut in the Kli de Daat, which is
the 81st operation. The second is the annulment of the Zivug and the
fall of the Koma to the Guf.
10) There are operations that stem from the 82nd operation. These are the
measurement of the Komat Malchut, being the 83rd operation, and the
Hamshacha of the He’arah, which is the 84th operation.
The Eser Sefirot de Rosh in Komat Malchut, called Malchuyot de
YESHSUT, stem from the two operations, the 83rd and the 84th, and
this is the 85th operation. Also, from that operation stems the He’arah
to the seventh Melech, being Malchut, and this is operation 86.
Two operations stems from the 86th operation, which are the Histalkut
Ohr, being the 87th operation, and the fall to BYA, which is the 88th
operation, as with the ninth and the tenth that stem from the eighth.
From the 87th operation, which is the Histalkut Ohr, stems the leaving
of the Reshimo, being the 89th operation. Two operations stem from
the 88th operation: the first is the ascent of the Reshimo and its
Hitlabshut in the new Melech de Daat, being the 90th operation. The
second is the annulment of the Zivug of the Rosh, and the fall of the
Koma to the Guf. This is the 91st operation.
11) The ascent of the general Masach de Guf de YESHSUT with the
Reshimot contained in it to the Rosh de YESHSUT for the renewal of
the Zivug stems from the 91st operation, which is the cancellation of
the Zivug de Rosh because of the Hizdakchut Masach in Kli de
Malchut.
It is so because after the Masach had purified from Malchut too, the
entire Aviut de Guf that was in it had completely stopped, and
equalized with the Masach de Rosh. This is the 92nd operation.

--- PAGE 621 ---
The 92nd operation is the ascent of the Masach de Guf de YESHSUT’
to its Shoresh to the Masach de Rosh. From it stems the renewal of the
Aviut of the Reshimo de Behina Aleph in it, and the elicitation of the
Zivug de Komat ZA in Hitkalelut in YESHSUT, and this is the 93rd
operation.
The 93rd operation is the new Koma that came out on Behina Aleph in
Hitkalelut in the Rosh de YESHSUT. From that stems the descent of
the Rosh to the place of Chazeh de Guf de YESHSUT. This is from the
upper Perek de Yesod up to Peh de YESHSUT at the upper third of
Tifferet in the place of the three Kelim: the two thirds of Tifferet,
Netzah, and Hod. In other words, it clothes its Guf de Elyon, as any
Partzuf Tachton, and this is the 94th operation.
The 95th operation is the Tikun Kavim in the Achoraim de YESHSUT
that fell to the Guf in this place, which the new Rosh clothes there, as
mentioned above in item 7 in the Rosh de YESHSUT. It stems from the
94th operation, namely the Halbasha of the Rosh de Komat ZA to the
place from Yesod upwards.
Three simultaneous operations stem from the 95th operation: these are
the new Kli in the two thirds of Tifferet through its Sium, meaning up
to the place of the new Peh de Rosh. This is the 96th operation. The
new Kli de Netzah on the right is the 97th operation, and the Kli de
Hod on the left is the 98th operation.
Five operations stem from these three operations: from the 96th
operation, which is the new Kli de Tifferet, stems the descent of the
Reshimo to the new Kli de Tifferet, and this is the 99th operation.
From the 97th operation, the new Kli de Netzah, results the descent of
the Reshimo de Netzah from the place of Gevura to the new Kli de
Netzah in its own place, and this is the 100th operation. From the 98th
operation, being the new Kli de Hod, stems the descent of the Reshimo
de Hod from Gevura to the new Kli de Hod in its own place, and this
is the 101st operation.

--- PAGE 622 ---
Two more operations stem from the above-mentioned 96th operation,
which is the new Kli de Tifferet that has been made: the first is the
descent of the Reshimo de Yesod to the Kli de Tifferet, which is the
102nd operation, and the second is the descent of the Reshimo de
Malchut to this Kli de Tifferet, being the 103rd operation.
Abbreviation for Cause and Consequence, without Explanations
1) The Masach de Guf de SAG rose to the Reshimot de NHY de AK to
MAN to AB SAG and they mated Panim be Panim. This is the first
operation.
A new Ohr that fissured the Parsa and returned the AHP came out by
the Zivug de AB SAG.
Two operations stem from the new Ohr: it illuminated through the
Tabur to the Keter and lowered the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim,
returned AVI to the Rosh, and brought them in a Zivug Panim be
Achor. This is the third operation. The second is that through Yesod
AK it illuminated MAN to AVI, and they came Panim be Panim. This
is the fourth operation.
2) Two operations stem from the two operations three and four: the first
measures the height of the Koma, which is the fifth operation, and the
second extends He’arat Hochma, and this is the sixth operation.
From the two operations five and six stem the Eser Sefirot de Rosh.
The fifth operation measures its Komat Keter, and the sixth operation
extends He’arat Hochma from this Koma, which is the seventh
operation.
The Eser Sefirot de Guf that expand to Melech ha Daat stem from the
Malchut of the seventh operation, and this is the eighth operation.
Two operations stem from the eighth operation: The first is Histalkut
Ohr from the Kli de Daat, being the ninth operation, and the second is
the fall to BYA, which is the tenth operation.
The leaving of the Reshimo is caused by the ninth operation, and this
is the eleventh operation. Also, two operations stem from the tenth

--- PAGE 623 ---
operation: the first is the descent of the Kli to Daat de BYA, being the
twelfth operation, and the second is the cancellation of the Zivug Rosh
and the fall of the Achoraim. This is the thirteenth operation.
3) Two operations stem from the third operation, which is the
cancellation of the Zivug de Komat Keter: that which measures the
height of Komat Hochma, which is the fourteenth operation, and the
second extends He’arat Hochma from this Koma. This is the fifteenth
operation.
The two operations, the fourteenth and the fifteenth, cause the Eser
Sefirot de Komat Hochma, called Guf de Abba. This is the sixteenth
operation from the Malchut of the sixteenth operation, causing the
Eser Sefirot de Guf that expand to Melech ha Hesed, and this is the
seventeenth operation.
Two operations stem from the seventeenth operation: this first is the
Histalkut of the Ohr, which is the eighteenth operation, and the second
is the fall to BYA, which is the nineteenth operation.
The leaving of the Reshimo is a resultant of the eighteenth operation,
and this is the twentieth operation. In addition, two operations stem
from the nineteenth operation. The first is the descent of the Reshimo
de Kli de Hesed to Bina de BYA. This is the 21st operation. The second
is the cancellation of the Zivug and the fall of the Achoraim, which is
the 22nd operation.
4) Two operations stem from the 22nd operation, which is the
cancellation of the Zivug: the first, which measures for Komat Bina,
being the 23rd operation, and the second, which extends He’arat
Hochma from this Koma, which is the 24th operation.
The Eser Sefirot de Komat Bina, called Guf de Ima, stem from the two
operations 23 and 24. The 23rd measures the Koma, and the 24th
extends the He’arah, and this is the 25th operation. From Malchut of
the 25th operation stems the Hitpashtut to the Guf to Melech ha
Gevura, and this is the 26th operation.

--- PAGE 624 ---
Two operations stem from the 26th operation: The first is the Histalkut
Ohr from the Kli de Gevura. This is the 27th operation. The second is
the fall to Hochma de BYA, and this is the 28th operation.
The leaving of the Reshimo stems from the 27th operation, being the
29th operation. In addition, two operations stem from the 28th
operation: the first is the descent of the Reshimo to NH de Atzilut,
being the 30th operation, and the second is the cancellation of the
Zivug, and this is the 31st operation.
5) Two operations stem from the 31st operation, that which measures
Komat ZA, being the 32nd operation, and the second, which extends
He’arah, being the 33rd operation. The Eser Sefirot called Yesodot de
AVI stem from these two, and this is the 34th operation.
From Malchut of the 34th operation stem the Eser Sefirot to Melech
Upper Third de Tifferet, and this is the 35th operation. Also, two
operations stem from operation 35: the Histalkut Ohr, which is the
36th operation, and the descent of the Kli to the two lower thirds of
Tifferet; this is the 37th operation.
The 36th operation induces the leaving of the Reshimo, which is the
38th operation, and the 37th operation induces the cancellation of the
Zivug de Rosh and the fall of the Achoraim, being the 39th operation.
6) The ascent of the Masach and the Reshimot in it to the Masach de
Rosh to AVI is the 40th operation, resulting from the 39th operation.
The Hitkalelut of the Masach in the Zivug Achor be Achor is the 41st
operation, resulting from the 40th operation, and its Hitkalelut in
Panim be Achor in AVI, being the 42nd operation, stems from the 41st
operation. Also, its Hitkalelut in Panim be Panim de AVI is the 43rd
operation, resulting from the 42nd operation.
The descent of the Koma from the Rosh from AVI to the place of
Chazeh de Guf de Nekudim stems from the 43rd operation, and this is
the 44th operation.

--- PAGE 625 ---
7) Four simultaneous operations stem from the 44th operation. This is
because its He’arah connects all four Komot de Achoraim de AVI that
fell to the Guf and became four new Kelim. The first is Daat, which is
the 45th operation; the second is Hesed on the right, which is the 46th
operation; the third is Gevura on the left, being the 47th operation; and
the fourth is the upper third of Tifferet, in the middle, and this is the
48th operation.
Four other operations stem from these four above operations:
The ascent of the Reshimo de Daat from Malchut de Atzilut clothes
the new Daat. This is the 49th operation, a resultant of the 45th
operation. Operation 50 is the ascent of the Reshimo de Hesed there,
resulting from the 46th operation.
From the 47th stems the ascent of the Reshimo de Gevura there, and
this is the 51st operation. Also, from the 48th operation stems the
ascent of Tifferet there, and this is the 52nd operation.
Three other operations stem from them: From the 49th operation stems
the descent of the Kli de Daat to Malchut de BYA, being the 53rd
operation; from operation 50 stems the descent of Kli de Hesed to
Yesod de BYA, which is the 54th operation, and from the 51st operation
stems the descent of Kli de Gevura to NH de BYA, being the 55th
operation.
8) Nine operations stem from one another from the 44th operation, which
is the Rosh de YESHSUT, up to the cancellation of its Koma. Two
operations are caused first: the first is the measurement for Komat
Hochma, which is the 56th operation; and the second extends He’arat
Hochma from the Koma, and this is the 57th operation.
The Eser Sefirot de Rosh called Histaklut Eynaim de YESHSUT result
from these two operations, being the 58th operation. From the 58th
operation stems the Hitpashtut to Melech of the two thirds of Tifferet,
and this is operation 59. Two operations stem from the 59th operation:

--- PAGE 626 ---
the first is the Histalkut of the Ohr, which is the 60th operation, and
the second is the fall to BYA, which is the 61st operation.
The leaving of the Reshimo is the 62nd operation, resulting form the
60th operation. Also, two operations stem from the 61st operation: the
first is the ascent of the Reshimo to the new Kli of the upper third of
Tifferet, which is the 63rd operation, and the second is the cancellation
of the Zivug and the fall of the Achoraim to the Guf. This is operation
64.
9) Two operations stem from the 64th operation: the first measures
Komat Bina and extends He’arah, which are the 65th and 66th
operations.
From these two operations stem Eser Sefirot de Komat Bina, called
Guf de YESHSUT, and this is the 67th operation. From the 67th
operation stem the Eser Sefirot de Guf to Melech NH, and this is the
68th operation.
Two operations stem from the 68th operation: the Histalkut Ohr, and
the fall of the Kli to BYA, which are the 69th and the 70th operations.
From operation 69 stems the leaving of the Reshimo, which is the 71st
operation. Also, from operation 70 stem two operations, the ascent of
the Reshimo to a new Kli de Gevura, which is the 72nd operation, and
the cancellation of the Zivug and the fall of the Achoraim, being the
73rd operation.
10) Two operations stem from the 73rd operation: measuring the Komat
ZA, and extending the He’arah, which are the 74th and 75th operations.
From them stem Eser Sefirot de Rosh, called Yesodot de YESHSUT.
This is the 76th operation.
The Hitpashtut to Melech ha Yesod stems from the 76th operation, and
this is the 77th operation. Two operations stem from the 77th operation:
the first is the Histalkut of the Ohr, which is the 78th operation, and
the second is the fall to BYA, being the 79th operation.

--- PAGE 627 ---
The 78th operation causes the leaving of the Reshimo, which is the
80th operation, and two operations stem from operation 79: the ascent
of the Reshimo to the new Kli de Daat, being the 81st operation, and
the annulment of the Zivug, being the 82nd operation.
11) Two operations stem from operation 82: it measures the Komat
Malchut, which is the 83rd operation, and extends He’arah, which is
the 84th operation. From them stem the Eser Sefirot de Rosh, called
Malchuyot de YESHSUT, which is the 85th operation. From that stems
Hitpashtut to the seventh Melech, which is the 86th operation.
Two operations result from the 86th operation: the Histalkut Ohr and
the fall to BYA, which are operations 87 and 88. The leaving of the
Reshimo stems from the 87th operation, and this is the 89th operation.
In addition, two operations stems from the 88th operation: the ascent
of the Reshimo to the Daat, which is the 90th operation, and the
annulment of the Zivug, which is 91st operation.
12) The ascent of the Masach and the Reshimot to YESHSUT stems from
the 91st operation, and this is the 92nd operation. From the 92nd
operation stems the elicitation of Komat ZA in Hitkalelut in
YESHSUT, and this is the 93rd operation.
From operation 93 stems the descent of this new Rosh to the place of
Chazeh de Guf YESHSUT, being the 94th operation. From the 94th
operation stems a Tikun Kavim in the Achoraim de YESHSUT, and this
is the 95th operation.
In addition, three simultaneous operations stem from the 95th
operation: a new Kli in the two lower thirds of Tifferet, which is the
96th operation, a Kli in Netzah on the right, which is the 97th
operation, and a Kli de Hod on the left, which is the 98th operation.
Five operations stem from these three operations: from the 96th
operation stems the Hitlabshut of the Reshimo of the two lower thirds
of Tifferet there. This is operation 99. Also, from operation 97 stems

--- PAGE 628 ---
the Hitlabshut of the Reshimo de Netzah there, which is the 100th
Reshimo.
The Hitlabshut of the Reshimo de Hod there stems from the 98th
operation, and this is the 101st operation, and from the above 96th
operation, two other operations stem: the first is the Hitlabshut of
Reshimo de Yesod there, being operation 102, and the second is the
Hitlabshut Reshimo de Malchut there, and this is operation 103.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 629 ---
PART EIGHT
The Eser Sefirot of Olam ha Atzilut
1. * When the Maatzil wanted to revive the dead and correct these
broken Melachim that were fallen into Olam Beria, He sentenced
and raised MAN from below upward. Thus, there was a Zivug
Elyon de HB de Inner AK, generating the new MA there, and the
Melachim were corrected.
Ohr Pnimi
1. Revive the dead.
Meaning the first seven fallen Melachim that fell into the separated
BYA. This fall is considered death since they are separated there from
the Light of life, meaning the Ohr Hochma, as it says, “wisdom
preserveth the life of him that hath it.” This is the reason that Ohr
Hochma is called Ohr Haya (Light of life).
Also, the three Olamot BYA are called The Separated Olamot, since
the Ohr Hochma cannot expand in these places and everything in
them will die without Hochma. They cannot be corrected except
through ascent to Atzilut, meaning to the place where there is Hochma
that can expand in them.
Hence, when they rise to Olam ha Atzilut they are considered to have
been revived, having been granted the Ohr Haya. It is written, “When
the Maatzil wanted to revive the dead,” meaning to raise them from
BYA to Atzilut, which is the revival of the dead. This is the meaning of
the correction of the seven Melachim.
He sentenced and raised MAN from below upward.
Meaning from ZON to Keter. The matter of raising MAN has already
been explained (Part 7, Ohr Pnimi item 24) and study it there.

--- PAGE 630 ---
However, here we should understand another principal issue: These
MAN are the seven Orot that remained of the seven Melachim,
meaning the Reshimot that the Orot de ZAT left after their departure.
This is so because once the Masach de Nekudim purified from its
Aviut entirely, it returned and rose to its Shoresh in Rosh de Nekudim
with all the Reshimot contained in it. Since it has already come there,
in Behina Aleph in the Zivug of Daat de Nekudim (see Ohr Pnimi item
70), you find that its last Behina is Behina Aleph.
Hence, the Masach did not become Av because of its Hitkalelut in the
Rosh, but only to the extent of the Aviut de Keter, since the last Behina
was lost. Thus, only Komat Malchut could have come out on it. Thus,
you find that the Hey Tata’a (lower Hey), incorporated in the Masach,
rose from the Eynaim to the Keter, and the Zivug was made on Sefirat
Keter. It turns out that the above rising of MAN is to the place of
Keter.
2. It has already been explained that the seven Orot of the Melachim
de BON rose, mingled and clothed the three Kavim HB and Keter,
which expanded to the end of the above-mentioned place, being
HGT.
Now that above Hitpashtut returned to be collected upward and
became as it first was, when only three were in their place above.
It raised the seven lower Orot with them to their place, and now
all seven lower Orot were up in Bina’s place. This is because she is
the Mother of the sons, and there is the place of the Herayon and
Ibur.
Ohr Pnimi
2. Now that above Hitpashtut returned to be collected upward etc. It
raised the seven lower Orot with them to their place etc. all seven
lower Orot.
This above-mentioned Hitpashtut was entirely from Behinat Hey
Tata’a (lower Hey) in the Eynaim. Now, that the Masach has been
purified entirely from all the Aviut de Guf of Behinat Hey Tata’a in the

--- PAGE 631 ---
Eynaim, they too rose and departed with the Masach and the Reshimot
to their Shoresh in the Rosh.
[Written aside by the author: this is where the Zivug de Katnut de Hey
Tata’a in the Eynaim comes from. However, it is insufficient from
Zivug de Gadlut in GAR since GAR too are not corrected for Gadlut.
They must raise MAN for Zivug AB SAG de AK that lowers the Hey
Tata’a from the Eynaim. Thus, when it says that He sentenced and
raised MAN, and hence there was the Zivug de HB, it is only for the
descent of the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim, like the new Ohr de
Nekudim that fissured the Parsa.]
Here we must remember what the Rav has written above (Part 7 item
49), that these Achoraim that fell to HGT are the Behinat MAN de AVI,
which ZON always raise for them until Gmar Tikun.
Also, you know that the Hitpashtut of the three Kavim KHB to HGT
are the Achoraim de Keter and AVI that fell to HGT (see Part 7 Ohr
Pnimi item 60). It follows, that the Reshimot that rose, meaning the
seven Orot, are the MAN for ZON de Atzilut of all Hey Partzufim.
The Achoraim de Keter and AVI, which are the Hitpashtut of the three
Kavim KHB, are the MAN for GAR of all the Partzufim de Atzilut, and
remember that. You will also learn here how ZON, which are the
seven Orot, raised the MAN de AVI, which are their Achoraim. This is
because the Hizdakchut of the Masach of ZAT raised the above-
mentioned Hitpashtut above, to their Shoresh, to GAR, as the Rav
explained (Part 7 item 49).
In Bina’s place. This is because she is the Mother of the sons, and
there is the place of the Herayon and Ibur.
This is because the matter of raising MAN applies only to Sefirat Bina.
Even raising MAN to Malchut is only after it was corrected with the
corrections of Ima. The reason is that the entire connection of raising
MAN is by Bina’s correlation with ZON de Ohr Yashar (see Part 7,
Ohr Pnimi item 24). Hence it does not apply to the other Sefirot,
which are not in possession of this correlation.

--- PAGE 632 ---
3. When the seven Orot rose upward, the Kelim that descended into
Beria rose upward to Atzilut as well. However, they did not join
together. The seven Orot were in a state of Ibur and “Gimel
contained in Gimel”, and the Nekudat (Nekuda of) Malchut was
their seventh, in the form of Psia le Bar. Likewise, the seven Kelim
were also in that manner, Gimel contained in Gimel, and Malchut
along with them.
Ohr Pnimi
3. The Kelim that descended into Beria rose upward to Atzilut as
well.
He tells us that the ascent of the Orot, meaning the Reshimot in the
correction of the MAN, correct their Kelim along with them to the
extent that the Reshimot were connected in this ascent. This is because
the Reshimot always receive the Tikun Kelim. This is what he means
when he says that when the seven Orot rose upward, the Kelim that
descended to Beria rose up in Atzilut as well.
However, they did not join together.
This means that although the place of the Reshimot is in their Kelim,
and although the Kelim have already been connected by them to rise
into Atzilut, the Reshimot are still unable to clothe in their Kelim. This
is because the Reshimot themselves still haven’t received their
complete correction through that ascent of MAN; they still need
Zivugim, called months of Ibur (will be explained in their place). By
the Reshimot being in the intestines of Bina, they acquire all the MAD
from the Zivugim de Ibur and become completely corrected, and then
clothe their Kelim.
4. However, the Behinat MAN we have mentioned above, when they
rose for the Zivug Elyon, is in itself the matter of the ascent of the
seven Orot above in Bina. Remember this forward regarding the
meaning of the topic of raising MAN.
In this Zivug, all Eser Sefirot from Keter to Malchut must be
corrected because even GAR are not corrected. Hence, this

--- PAGE 633 ---
Behinat “raising” of these MAN was above in AB SAG de AK.
Ohr Pnimi
4. Even GAR are not corrected.
This because nothing of the Mochin de Gadlut that they’d received in
Nekudim remained in them, but only what was in them when they
were first created by the Zivug de Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey Eynaim.
Hence they lack all the Behinot Gadlut. This is why it is written that
even the GAR are not corrected.
Hence, this Behinat “raising” of these MAN was above in AB SAG
de AK.
This means that there is no raising of MAN but only from the Tachton
to its Elyon by one degree, meaning from ZON to AVI, from AVI to AA
etc. but not to the one higher than it by two degrees.
It is written that since GAR also need Tikun, and they too need raising
MAN, it is necessary that the Upper Behina of raising MAN will be the
Rosh SAG. This is because the MAN de ZAT are corrected in AVI de
Nekudim, MAN de AVI in Keter de Nekudim, MAN de Keter in Rosh
ha Aleph de Nekudim, and MAN de Rosh ha Aleph de Nekudim are
corrected in Rosh SAG, meaning every Tachton in its Elyon.
He says above that all the MAN together, meaning both ZAT de
Nekudim and GAR de Nekudim, rose to GAR de Nekudim, which are
seven Reshimot of seven Orot de ZAT being the Achoraim de HB and
Keter. However, that does not mean that all were corrected there
together, but only gradually. Each Tachton raised the MAN of its Elyon
to its Ali Elyon, which in turn, corrects them for the Elyon.
Thus, each sorted out a part of the general MAN and raised them to its
Ali Elyon, until they ascended to the Upper AB SAG.
5. *Thus, by raising this above MAN, which are the aforementioned
Orot, the Behinat HaVaYaH de AB de Yodin mated, namely the
collective Behinat Mochin de AK with Behinat Taamim de SAG,
which are AHP.

--- PAGE 634 ---
This is because these Taamim de SAG did not have any breaking in
them, and hence mated along with the Behinat AB de AK. This
does not refer to the departing Orot from the Hevel AHP, only to
the Behina of their actual self and Pnimiut.
Ohr Pnimi
5. Mochin de AK with Behinat Taamim de Ruach.
Though all the Nekudim, even Rosh ha Aleph in them, extend from
Nekudot de SAG, for which the MAN should have risen only up to the
Nekudot in Rosh de SAG, in fact, they rose to Nekudot de SAG.
However, because with this ascent, the Zivug de AB SAG occurred,
during which the He’arat AB that reached SAG lowered the Hey
Tata’a from the Eynaim de SAG to Peh de SAG, this connected the
AHP that came out of Rosh de SAG. They return to Behinat Rosh, and
the Nekudot connect with the Taamim de SAG into a single degree.
In that state, the Nekudot de SAG do not merit a name any longer, as
they are annulled in the Upper Behina in them, being the Taamim.
Hence, the ascent of MAN is also considered to have risen to the
Taamim, for the Nekudot do not bear a name, as they are nullified
before them, as the Rav has written (Part 6 item 6).
Know, that from here comes the rule that every ascent of MAN is from
the Tachton to the Ali Elyon, and the Ali Elyon corrects them from the
Elyon. This is because ZON raise the MAN their Elyon, which are
YESHSUT, to the Ali Elyon, which are AVI. AVI correct them for
YESHSUT, and so it is in all the degrees.
It is so because any ascent of MAN induces the lowering of the Hey
Tata’a from the Nikvey Eynaim down, by which it acquires the GAR.
Hence, when ZON raise the MAN de YESHSUT, they induce the
lowering of the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim de AVI downward. In that
state YESHSUT connect with AVI into a single degree and YESHSUT
acquires its GAR, meaning Behinat AVI. You see that the MAN that
ZON raised for YESHSUT rose to Behinot AVI, meaning to the Hey

--- PAGE 635 ---
Tata’a in the Eynaim de AVI, which in turn, lowered it, thus correcting
the Mochin de YESHSUT.
Thus, the Tachton raised the MAN for its Elyon, which are AVI. AVI
mated together on the MAN and lowered the Hey Tata’a from their
Eynaim downward, and thus connected YESHSUT to their own
degree, and YESHSUT acquired its GAR. Now you can understand the
Rav’s comparison (Part 6 item 6) of AB SAG to AVI and YESHSUT
there.
This matter began in the first ascent of MAN in the Olamot, being the
ascent of MAN of the Inner NHY de AK to the Taamim de Rosh SAG in
the Rav’s words above (Part 6 item 6), which lowered the Hey Tata’a
from Eynaim to Peh de SAG.
However, since here the Hey Tata’a rose to Keter, which is the
Metzach, hence, the Hey Tata’a descended from Metzach to Peh. It is
written, “By raising this above MAN, which are the
aforementioned Orot, the Behinat HaVaYaH de AB de Yodin mated,
namely the collective Behinat Mochin de AK with Behinat Taamim
de SAG, which are AHP.” This is because Rosh SAG is called Awzen,
Hotem, Peh, because the Upper Behina in it is the Ohr of the Awzen,
meaning Bina.
It clothes Partzuf AB de AK from the Chazeh upward to Peh de AB.
Hence, HGT de AB de AK are considered Behinat Mochin to SAG, and
also as the general Mochin that extend from AK. this is because the
first Partzuf de AK is higher than the Olamot and they only shine
through HGT de AB, which are the Mochin de SAG de AK. After the
He’arat Mochin from these AB extends to Rosh SAG, meaning to the
Taamim, the Hey Tata’a descends from Metzach to Peh.
These Taamim de SAG did not have any breaking in them.
You must know here, that the breaking begins even before Olam ha
Nekudim, meaning in the lower nine de Partzuf SAG de AK, called
Nekudot de SAG, which expanded from Tabur de SAG down to its
Sium Raglin (Part 6 item 3). Because they expanded from Tabur
downward in the place of NHY de AK ha Pnimi, they mixed with

--- PAGE 636 ---
Behina Dalet, which caused the Tzimtzum in both Olamot, called
Tzimtzum NHY de AK.
Because of the mixing of Behina Bet, which is Bina, in Behina Dalet,
which is Malchut, Bina acquired the Behinat Tzimtzum of Malchut.
Hence, Bina and ZON departed from all the degrees outside, where
AHP de Rosh came out into Behinat Guf and Bina and ZON de Guf
came out to Behinat NHY below Tabur. Bina and ZON of the Eser
Sefirot de NHY went completely out of Atzilut and became the
Separated BYA.
Thus, in SAG too, Bina and ZON de NHY came out and fell to BYA as
in the breaking of the vessels. However, this occurred only in Nekudot
de SAG that expanded from Tabur down and mixed with Hey Tata’a.
It does not concern the Upper half of SAG at all, called Taamim, which
end above Tabur de AK. this is the meaning of the words, “The ascents
of MAN were to the Taamim de SAG, which did not have any breaking
in them.”
Departing Orot from the Hevel AHP, only to the Behina of their
actual self and Pnimiut.
There are two kinds of AHP:
1. Rosh de SAG, called Taamim de SAG. Because its Koma is up to Bina,
it is named AHP.
2. The Havalim of AHP, which departed from the degree. They are
considered branches that come out of SAG, which are Se’arot Dikna
de SAG that become Shorashim to the GAR de Nekudim (Part 6 item
4). That is why it is written that the Zivug de AB was with the AHP,
being the Taamim de SAG, and not with the Partzuf Se’arot, which
came out, being Behinot Nekudot de Rosh SAG that were broken.
Although the Elyon is related to the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim, it is only
the Nekudot de SAG, meaning the Se’arot Dikna. However, they are
nullified in Taamim de SAG and do not bear a name at all, since the
Zivug de AB connects them to the degree of Rosh de SAG during the
Zivug (Part 8, Ohr Pnimi, beginning of item 5).

--- PAGE 637 ---
6. When they mated together, a new Ohr was born from them,
through this Zivug. This new Ohr is called MA de Alephin. It too is
divided into four Behinot TNTO, containing the entire Atzilut in
this manner: Taamim de MA is Behinat Atik Yomin; Nekudot de
MA are AA; Tagin de MA are AVI; Otiot de MA are ZON. This MA
de Alephin comes out from the Metzach de AK.
Ohr Pnimi
6. MA de Alephin.
Meaning HaVaYaH filled with Alephin, like that: Yod He Vav He (הא
׀א׀ הא י׀ד). The filling with Alephin indicates the correction of the
breaking because this new Ohr that comes out of the Zivug de AB and
SAG returns the AHP that were broken from the degree, to the degree
as before.
This matter is implied in the shape of the Aleph (א), because it
contains two Yodin and a Parsa in between. The first Yod is Keter and
Hochma that remained in the degree. This is the Mayim Elyonim. The
bottom Yod is the AHP, meaning Bina and ZON that were broken from
the degree, and went out. This is the Mayim Tachtonim.
The Kav that separates between them is the Parsa, and the Rakia that
separates between the Mayim Elyonim and the Mayim Tachtonim. A
new Ohr emerges by the Zivug Elyon de AB SAG, fissuring that Parsa
and connecting the AHP back to the degree.
Even though the matter of the breaking of the AHP happened back in
Partzuf Nekudot de SAG, HaVaYaH de SAG is still filled with Yodin,
not with Alephin. The breaking was at the bottom half of SAG, which
are Nekudot. This is because there weren’t any breaking in the Upper
half, as the Rav said, that there weren’t any breaking in Taamim de
SAG. Hence, its Upper half, which are Yod Hey, are filled with Yodin,
while its bottom half is already filled with א in its Vav.
This א implies the breaking of the AHP that occurred there. Know,
that this א in the filling of Vav de SAG is considered the Shoresh of the
name MA de Alephin (see Part 6, Table of Questions, item 1).

--- PAGE 638 ---
TNTO, containing the entire Atzilut.
The Taamim are Keter, Nekudot are Hochma, the Tagin are Bina, and
the Otiot, ZON. The Taamim de MA, which are Keter, is Atik Yomin de
Atzilut, AA is Hochma de MA, AVI are Bina de MA, and ZON are ZA
de MA, called Otiot.
Comes out from the Metzach de AK.
It means that the ascent of MAN was to the Metzach, meaning to
Sefirat Keter de Rosh, called Galgalta, where the Metzach is. The
reason for it is the last Behina of the Nekudim is Behina Aleph. Hence,
all that remains in the Masach is the Behinat Aviut of the Keter (see
Part 8, Ohr Pnimi item 1).
We must remember that there is no ascent of MAN but to Bina. Hence,
it does not mean that these MAN rose to Keter de Keter, but to Bina de
Keter. Indeed, Galgalta, is regarded as merely Bina de Keter. You will
also learn that Galgalta is divided like Bina and like Tifferet. Its Upper
third is always covered and concealed in the Achoraim de Bina, but
only in the two bottom thirds, which are Behinat ZAT de Bina.
The Behinat from Chazeh de Tifferet downward is where He’arat
Hochma appears (Part 7, Ohr Pnimi item 45). Know, that this is the
meaning of Panim and Achoraim de Galgalta. It is so because from
the Metzach upward it is Behinat Upper third of Tifferet, concealed
and covered in the Achoraim de Ima. For that reason the Se’arot
Reisha cover there.
From the place of the end of Se’arot down to the Eynaim is a place
called Metzach. It is considered the two revealed thirds of Tifferet
from the Chazeh downward where Yesod de Ima has already stopped.
It is written, “This MA de Alephin comes out from the Metzach de
AK.” This is so because the existence of the manifestation of the
He’arat Hochma begins there. However, above there it is covered
with Se’arot Reisha for it is Behinat GAR de Bina and the Upper part
of Tifferet, where He’arat Hochma cannot appear.

--- PAGE 639 ---
7. We have already explained above that things advance gradually:
The Hevel of the Awzen is unfelt. A little bit of Hevel comes out of
the Hotem, and the Hevel of the Hotem is less than the Hevel of the
Peh, though they are all equal in that they raise Hevel.
However, the Ayin has no Hevel, only Histaklut. The reason for this
difference is that the three are Behinat Taamim, but the Ayin is
Behinat Nekudot SAG, which is below the degree of Taamim.
Ohr Pnimi
7. Things advance gradually.
It means that the sequence follows the gradual order of the Aviut in the
Masach, as it contains five Behinot Aviut, discerned according to the
Sefirot de Ohr Yashar. The first three Behinot, which are Behina
Dalet, Behina Gimel, and Behina Bet, called “Peh”, “Hotem”,
“Awzen”, are actual Havalim.
This is because they raise Ohr Hozer called Hevel in a manner
sufficient for the emergence of Partzuf in RTS. They are the three
Partzufim, Galgalta, AB, SAG de AK. However, Behina Aleph de Aviut
does not raise sufficient Hevel for the Hitpashtut to the Guf. Hence, it
is named Histaklut Dak.
Behinat Aviut de Shoresh, called Keter, does not have Hevel for
Hitpashtut in the Guf. However, by the ascent of Hey Tata’a to the
Eynaim, Behina Aleph too becomes capable for the emergence of a
Partzuf, which is the Partzuf called Nekudim, or BON.
Also, by the ascent of Hey Tata’a to the Keter, meaning to the
Metzach, Behinot Shoresh de Masach also become worthy of the
emergence of a Partzuf. This Partzuf is called the new MA, which is
the Eser Sefirot de Atzilut.
Hence, this Ohr Hozer that comes out on the Hey Tata’a that rose to
Metzach, is only called manifestation of He’arah, or Ratzon, and not
as Hevel, or Histaklut. This indicates that it does not have actual Aviut,
but Behinat Shoresh of the Aviut, hence the name Ratzon.

--- PAGE 640 ---
The four Behinot Aviut are gradual magnifications in the will to
receive. However, their Behinat Shoresh is only a Behinat will to
bestow, without any will to receive, except that it is a Shoresh for
them. For that reason it is named a mere Ratzon, or “Ratzon of the
Metzach”.
8. This new Ohr MA that comes out of the Metzach is the very last,
hence it has no Behinat Hevel, like the three, and no Behinot
Histaklut, like the Nekudot of the Ayin. It has only Behinat
He’arah.
This is the meaning of what is written in the Zohar (Idra Zuta):
“Appearing in the Metzach.” This is because there is only a
separate manifestation of He’arah.
It is also the meaning of what is written in many places in the
Zohar, “When the Re’uta came to create the Olam of Atzilut.” it
means that Metzach of the Ratzon de AK came up in His will to
create Olam ha Atzilut by the new Ohr MA that comes out of Him,
by which the entire Atzilut was corrected. Thus, the meaning of
Ratzon is the aforementioned Metzach of the Ratzon, because the
translation of the Ratzon is Re’uta.
9. Behinat AB is in the Rosh of AK, which are Behinat Mochin, and
their place is inside, opposite the place of the Metzach, where the
Mochin, which are Behinat AB, mate with Behina SAG, being AHP
de Taamim de SAG. These are below the Mochin, at the end of the
Rosh. Because of the great Ohr there at the Metzach, due to that
Zivug, a new Ohr extended from it downward, named “The New
MA”.
10. When this new Ohr came out, named MA de Alephin, it sorted out
what it could sort out from the Nekudot de SAG that had the
breaking in them. These joined and participated with Him, and
then the MA became Behinat Dechura and SAG became Behinat
Nukva.
However, since this SAG has become Nukva to MA, it now
acquired a different name, which is BON de Heyin, like this: Yod,

--- PAGE 641 ---
Heh, Vav, Heh (הה ׀׀ הה י׀ד). It is no longer called SAG, but BON.
Ohr Pnimi
10. It sorted out what it could sort out from the Nekudot de SAG that
had the breaking in them.
This examination begins at Rosh ha Bet de Nekudim, which is Keter
de Nekudim. However, Rosh ha Aleph de Nekudim that stands above
Tabur did not connect with this new MA because there wasn’t any
breaking in it. This is because the Masach stands below it and the
Aviut in the Masach cannot blemish above its location.
SAG became Behinat Nukva.
This does not refer to SAG de AK, only to the Eser Sefirot of the
Nekudim, which the Rav calls SAG because their Kelim are from the
Behinat lower nine of SAG, called Nekudot de SAG.
11. The thing is that the name SAG is the general TNTO. Though
these are only Nekudot de SAG, it is not called SAG, like the rest of
it, because they are but a single item in the name SAG. Hence,
when this item, being the Nekudot, connected with the name MA
and became Nukva to it, it is now called BON.
Ohr Pnimi
11. Only Nekudot de SAG, it is not called SAG, like the rest of it.
As it is written in the previous item, the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim are
sometimes called SAG, because their Kelim are from Nekudot de SAG,
meaning its lower half. It is written, “Though these are only Nekudot
de SAG, it is not called SAG, like the rest of it, because they are
but a single item in the name SAG.”
The essence of SAG is the Taamim in it. This means that before the
Masach in it began to purify, there is Komat Hochma there. However,
once it begins to purify from this Koma, there is no longer Komat SAG
in it (see Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 1).
12. Though it is necessarily so, that although they are only Behinot
Nekudot, there is a Behina in them that joins with the Taamim de

--- PAGE 642 ---
MA, and a Behina that joins with the Nekudot de MA. The same
applies for the other divisions, though all together, they are only
Behinot Nekudot de SAG.
Through this connection of MA with it, these Nekudot have now
connected and became Nukvin (pl. for Nukva) to them. That
reason they are called Melachim, from the word Malchut,
indicating that they’ve become Nukva to MA de Alephin.
Ohr Pnimi
12. There is a Behina in them that joins with the Taamim de MA.
This is because the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim came out in five
Partzufim GASMB. Hence, there is also TNTO in them, where each
Behina connects in its opposite Behina in the TNTO of the new MA,
though there are some changes in them that will be explained below.
13. *The realization of the place of the Hitpashtut of these male and
female Partzufim was made of the joining of MA and BON. Their
place is the place where the Nekudot that came out through the
Nikvey Eynaim were at first, meaning from Tabur de AK to the Sof
of its Raglaim.
The Ohr Metzach is called MA there. Though it came out above
the Metzach, it expands from there downward and begins its
existence from Tabur to the Sof of its Sium Raglin.
Ohr Pnimi
13. The Ohr Metzach etc. and begins its existence from Tabur to the
Sof of its Sium Raglin.
This is because all Eser Sefirot of the new MA are an upshot of the
Eser Sefirot de Nekudim, since they came out on the Behinat Masach
de Guf de Nekudim that purified and rose to the Metzach (Part 8 Ohr
Pnimi item 1). Hence, it cannot clothe Rosh ha Aleph de Nekudim,
standing from Tabur de AK upward, but begins at the Peh de Rosh ha
Aleph, which is at the place of Tabur de AK. Its existence necessarily
begins from the Tabur to its Sium Raglin.

--- PAGE 643 ---
14. What has changed now from the beginning, when the Nekudot of
the Eynaim came out, is that then the Nekudat Keter was by itself,
alone in its place. After it was the Nekudat Hochma alone by itself,
and similarly were all ten Sefirot.
However, a great Tikun was added now. The point of Keter
extended and expanded from its place down to close to the Sium
Raglin of AK. This entire measure of Hitpashtut is called Olam ha
Atzilut, and that point is called Nukva de Atik Yomin.
Likewise, Atik Yomin Dechura that was made of the Taamim de
MA expanded similarly too, and so did all the rest, AA and Nukva,
AVI and ZON. They clothed one another up to Behinat ZON so
that the Raglaim of all the Partzufim de Atzilut, whether Atik, AA,
AVI, or ZON, all ended equally. They end together, slightly above
Sium Raglin of AK, and this is the Sium of the entire Atzilut.
By so doing, they became Neshama to one another, one clothing
the other. Also, by that the creatures can receive the Orot Elyonim,
which are now covered and clothing one within the other. Their
Kelim grew too by expanding all the way down. Since they are big
Kelim, they have the strength to receive their Orot.
Ohr Pnimi
14. The point of Keter extended and expanded from its place down
etc.
This means that one Sefira of Keter expanded into a complete Partzuf
Rosh and Guf in itself. It is called Partzuf Atik de Atzilut, whose place
begins at Tabur de AK and expands to Sium de Atzilut.
The reason for this Hitpashtut is the ascent of the Hey Tata’a to the
Keter. In Nekudim, when Hey Tata’a rose to the Eynaim, it caused
each degree to divide in two: GE became the Elyon, and AHP became
the Tachton, as in the division of AVI and YESHSUT.
Now the Hey Tata’a rose to the Keter and all lower nine came out of
the degree of Keter. Hence, Keter was divided and made into a
complete degree in itself. From the Metzach upward they are the GAR

--- PAGE 644 ---
in it, and the Rosh in it. From the Metzach down it is Behinat Guf and
ZAT in it. It is called Atik de Atzilut. Similarly, each and every Sefira
of the Eser Sefirot de MA was divided into a whole Partzuf in itself,
Rosh and Guf.
They clothed one another up to Behinat ZON.
This is because each Partzuf is born and comes out of the Peh of the
Rosh de Elyon, hence clothing the ZAT de Elyon from the Peh down.
Slightly above Sium Raglin of AK, and this is the Sium of the
entire Atzilut.
The Sium Raglaim of AK is at the actual Nekuda de Olam ha Zeh, as it
is written, “And His feet shall stand upon the mount of Olives.”
However, the Sium of Atzilut is made in Tzimtzum Bet de AK, where
Bina and ZON de Eser Sefirot de NHY from Behinat SAG de AK came
out of Olam Atzilut and became the Separated BYA.
Thus, the distance between the Sium of the Atzilut and the Sium
Raglaim of AK is as the measure of the above Bina and ZON de Eser
Sefirot de NHY. It is written that the Sium of the Atzilut is slightly
above Sium Raglaim of AK.
Their Kelim grew too by expanding all the way down. Since they
are big Kelim, they have the strength to receive their Orot.
This is because the Gadlut of the Kelim means multiplicity of
Masachim. The Masachim diminish the Orot to expand in measure
and weight so that the Orot can exist in the Kelim.
15. This Ohr of the new MA that comes out of the Metzach is the
eighth Melech, called Hadar (mentioned in Parashat Vayyishlach),
where death is not mentioned in the Torah, since he did not die
like the others. On the contrary, he corrects and sustains the first
seven Melachim that died before him.
16. When he came out, he immediately began to sort these Behinot
Melachim out, to make Behinot Nukva to him, called BON de
Heyin. Hence, it is said about him, “and Hadar reigned in his
stead; and his wife’s name was Mehetabel.” This is as the Zohar

--- PAGE 645 ---
says, “Until now, the male and female were not mentioned at all.
Now, however, because of them they all exist, for now there are
visible male and female,” as mentioned in Idra Raba.
17. *This above-mentioned Behinat Ibur was forced to wait and be
delayed for twelve months, as it is written in the Tikkunim in an
article called “The Measurement Line”. The reason was to correct
the entire Atzilut, which are the twelve Behinot Atik and Nukva,
AA and Nukva, Upper AVI, YESHSUT and ZON, Yaakov and
Leah. These are twelve complete Partzufim, hence the reason this
Ibur had to last twelve months.
Ohr Pnimi
17. This above-mentioned Behinat Ibur was forced to wait and be
delayed for twelve months.
Komat Malchut, which is the most restricted Katnut possible, is called
Ibur. This comes from the word Avara (impregnation) and Dinim, as it
is written “But the LORD became pregnant in me for your sakes.”
However, here we should understand, that they are three Sefirot in
thickness, in the form of Gimel Kavim, called NHY. This is because a
lesser measure than that is not called a Partzuf, as it is written, “and
behold a well in the field, and, lo, three flocks of sheep lying there by
it,” which are NHY.
Even though the Koma is but one Sefira of Malchut, still, because
there is Tikun Kavim there, it contains three Behinot: right, left, and
middle. These three Behinot in Komat Malchut are called Netzah,
Hod, Yesod, hence we discern them as standing thickwise one within
the other.
This indicates that although there are three Sefirot there, they do not
increase Komat Malchut in any way. Instead, all those three are on a
Koma of a single Sefira.
The issue of the months of pregnancy refers to renewals of He’arot
that the Partzuf generates and manifests during the situation of
Behinot Ibur. These are seven months, nine months, or twelve months.

--- PAGE 646 ---
Any Hidush He’arah is called “Month”, and here the Rav says that
this Ibur consists of twelve months, to manifest twelve Partzufim.
The reason was to correct the entire Atzilut, which are the twelve
Behinot.
It means that through the ascent of this MAN to the Metzach, which is
Behinat Bina de Keter, where the Eser Sefirot on Komat Malchut
came out, called Ibur, this Ibur needs to fully correct the entire Atzilut,
all the way. Also, because they are twelve Behinot, they need twelve
months.
The reason for that is because all the Behinot diminished, fell and
broke during the breaking of the vessels de Nekudim, all together rose
to MAN to this Ibur. The Rav said above (item 2) that they contain all
the Partzufim from Olam Atzilut and BYA, all of them (see Ohr Pnimi
item 4). This is because all four Achoraim of the Upper AVI and
YESHSUT, contained in the three Kavim KHB, rose and regrouped
above (Ohr Pnimi item 2), as well as the seven Orot of the Reshimot
that remained of the seven Melachim that fell to BYA.
The four Achoraim de AVI and YESHSUT contain all the Partzufim de
GAR that came out in Atzilut. Also, the seven Orot contain the ZON,
four Olamot Atzilut and BYA. Thus, all the Olamot contained in the
MAN that rose to the Zivug to Keter, and thus must all be corrected by
this Zivug de Ibur.
You already know that there is an opposite value between the Orot and
the Kelim. In the Kelim, the Elyonim grow first, and in the Orot it is
the opposite, the Tachtonim clothe first. Hence, Komat Ibur, called
NHY clothes Kelim de KHB.
It turns out that by the above-mentioned general Zivug, all twelve
Partzufim came out from the Behinat Ibur, one below the other, KHB
de Atik and Nukva, and afterwards KHB de Arich Nukva. After that
KHB de AVI, then KHB de YESHSUT, then KHB de ZON, and then
KHB de Yaakov and Leah. All of them came out by the single Zivug
Elyon, though they came one below the other in a gradual order.

--- PAGE 647 ---
18. *This Behinat Ohr Metzach is sometimes mentioned in the book of
Zohar in that manner, which is “When the Upper Metzach
appeared etc.” The thing is that the profusion of Ohr in that place
causes He’arah to expand and extend below.
Reisha de AK is the place of the Mochin in it, being HaVaYaH de
AB. Their place is inside the Rosh and the Metzach coats and
covers opposite them. That was the place of the Zivug of the Orot
Mochin, called AB, with Orot de Awzen Hotem Peh, called SAG.
Hence, from that place itself, which is the Metzach, standing
opposite the Mochin, came this new Ohr MA that was born out of
the above Zivug. This Ohr that came out of the Metzach expanded
from there down, and its primary existence stood from Tabur de
AK down until close its Sium Raglin.
Ohr Pnimi
18. The profusion of Ohr in that place causes He’arah to expand and
extend below.
We have learned that all four Achoraim de AVI and YESHSUT and all
seven Orot of the seven Melachim, all rose to MAN to the Metzach. It
has also been explained that first there was a Zivug on the Masach
only on Komat Malchut, called Ibur. That corrected only a very small
portion of the general MAN that rose there, only the Behinot NHY in
each Partzuf from the Partzufim of Atzilut.
Accordingly, most of the MAN remained there without any Tikun. Also
all these four Komot Rosh and Guf, contained in the Achoraim of the
Upper AVI and the four Orot DHGT, the four Komot Rosh and Guf
contained in the Achoraim de YESHSUT, and the four Orot NHYM, all
these remained there without Tikun.
It is written, “the profusion of Ohr in that place causes He’arah to
expand and extend below.” It is so because thus they became MAN
to the Upper AB SAG. It is as he wrote that by this Zivug from the
He’arat AB, the Hey Tata’a descends from the place of Metzach to the
place of the Peh. Then the Zivug is made on the Hey Tata’a in the

--- PAGE 648 ---
place of Peh, and Komat Keter de MA extends on it. This is the
Behinat Zachar de Atik, meaning the first Koma of the new MA.
This Ohr that came out of the Metzach expanded from there down.
This is because this new Ohr that came out of the Zivug de AB SAG
expanded and came to Rosh ha Aleph de Nekudim, standing from
Tabur de AK upward, and from it to Rosh de Atik, standing in the place
of GAR de Nekudim. Also, Rosh de Atik came out from the place of
Peh de Nekudim upward to the Tabur de AK, and Eser Sefirot de Guf
from Peh de Nekudim downward to Sium of the Atzilut.
We must thoroughly understand the difference between here and the
previous Partzufim. In all the previous Partzufim the ascent of the
Masach was after the completion of its Hizdakchut to the Rosh of its
Partzuf Elyon, meaning its Shoresh.
Here, the Masach rose to the Ali Elyon since the Elyon of the new MA
is Partzuf Nekudim. It had to rise to the Peh of GAR de Nekudim and
not to AB SAG, which are the Partzuf Elyon of Nekudim. However,
this thing was already explained by the Rav above (item 4), where he
says that the reason is that GAR de Nekudim themselves are not
corrected, hence the Behinat raising MAN there was to AB SAG.
GAR de Nekudim did not break, nor were they even touched by the
cancellation of the Achoraim, since they are only Behinot additions to
what they received through He’arat NHY de AK. However, their own
Behina, meaning everything that came out at the beginning of their
creation, was not cancelled from them even a bit.
Yet, since the Masach rose to them with all the Reshimot in it, their
ascent caused the manifestation of the absence in them. This is
because the whole issue of the correction of GAR de Nekudim was by
the Achor be Achor, meaning the small He’arah that they received
from the Ohr of the Awzen (Part 7, Ohr Pnimi item 5).
It is so because through the He’arah of the Achoraim de Bina, they are
not blemished at all by the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, which is at
Keter de Nekudim above them, preventing He’arat Hochma from

--- PAGE 649 ---
them. Without it, they would not receive Hochma too, because of the
He’arat Bina in them, which has no wish for Hochma, but for
Hassadim, “for she delights in Mercy.”
The Masach and the Reshimot rose to them, as all these Reshimot are
Behinot ZON that require He’arat Hochma. They had already had
He’arat Hochma, for even the four Achoraim de AVI and YESHSUT
are also Reshimot from the Komot that emerged on the MAN of Yesod
de AK, called Vav and Nekuda, which are Behinot ZON.
Then, Ima de Nekudim had to stop her Behinat Achoraim, and could
not do so because of the Hey Tata’a above her. For that reason the
deficit appeared because of the Tzimtzum Hochma by the force of the
Hey Tata’a over her. Because the deficit appeared, they too had to rise
to MAN to their Elyon to receive Tikun.
Thus, GAR de Nekudim were forced to rise with the Masach and the
Reshimot to their Rosh de Elyon, which is Rosh de SAG de AK, and all
of them became Behinat MAN to the Rosh de SAG. in the beginning,
the Masach was incorporated in the Zivug de Rosh SAG itself. By that
it did not become more Av from the Behinat Aviut in the Keter de
Masach because the last Behina it had as a Masach in Partzuf
Nekudim is Behina Aleph, and it is known that the last Behina is
always lost by the past Hizdakchut.
It turns out that the Masach cannot become more Av now, but only in
Behinat Shoresh, which is Behinat Aviut de Keter. It is therefore
considered that the Masach de Rosh SAG rose for that Zivug to its
Behinat Metzach, meaning Galgalta, which is Keter de Rosh.
The Metzach is a part of the Galgalta, but it is its Behinat Bina. The
Ohr Elyon mated with the Masach and Eser Sefirot came out on it on
Komat Malchut. This is so because even though the Hey Tata’a is also
incorporated in this Masach, yet because she stands at Keter, only
Aviut de Keter can manifest in her, producing only Komat Malchut.
You already know that this Zivug is called Behinat Ibur and has three
Kavim, called NHY.

--- PAGE 650 ---
However, this is still not all of it. In this Zivug the Reshimot are not
corrected in the Masach, only the smaller part in them. Thus, there
was still great pressure there, due to the abundance of Ohr of all the
Reshimot that need correction. It is known that the Reshimot de ZON
have a great connection with Behinat Bina, being SAG, to receive
Behinat He’arat Hochma from her through the connection of Bina and
ZON de Ohr Yashar.
Hence, he rose a second time to MAN to SAG de AK. Then Rosh SAG
returned the Panim to the Mochin in it, meaning Behinat HGT de AB,
clothed in its Rosh in Behinot Mochin and Neshama. The AB SAG are
found to be mating and the new Ohr that comes out of this Zivug
lowers the Hey Tata’a that rose to Metzach there, when reaching Rosh
SAG.
This is because Orot de AB are always complete and there is no
breaking in them, for which it lowered the Hey Tata’a to the place of
the Peh, meaning in the place of the Zivug, operating in AB itself.
Because the Hey Tata’a came to its place in the Peh, the Masach
received Behina Dalet de Hitlabshut from her, and Behina Gimel de
Aviut in her.
In that state the Ohr Elyon that mated with the Masach generated Eser
Sefirot on Komat Keter. This Koma emerged on the Masach and
Reshimot now contained in Rosh SAG itself. From there the Masach
descended to the place of Tabur de AK, meaning to the Tachton de
SAG, and the same Eser Sefirot came out in Komat Keter, which is
Behinat Rosh ha Aleph de Nekudim.
The Masach descended from there to the place of Peh de Nekudim and
there too Eser Sefirot came out in Komat Keter. These Eser Sefirot are
Behinat Rosh de Atik Dechura. From Peh de Nekudim down, Eser
Sefirot de Guf expanded from above downward, which are called ZAT
de Atik.
In fact, the Masach should have come down to the place of Chazeh de
Nekudim for there is its true Shoresh. This is because this Masach was

--- PAGE 651 ---
from Behinat Guf de Nekudim, meaning from the Hitpashtut of the
seven Melachim.
However, GAR de Nekudim needed it, for they receive Komat Keter
from it, and hence hold it in their place. Moreover, it is considered
their Behinat Zachar [another version from the manuscript of Baal
HaSulam, requires scrutiny: It is truer to say that Atik clothes the Guf
de Rosh ha Aleph de Nekudim. This is because Atik is Rosh ha Aleph
de Atzilut. We can also answer that even though GAR de Nekudim
actually stand below Tabur de AK, because of Behina Dalet that mixed
in them, yet in fact, they clothe from Peh de Rosh SAG downward,
and the Atzilut below Tabur de SAG.], meaning because it gives them
GAR, which they do not have when they are first created.
19. *When the Tikun of the eighth Melech came, called Hadar, he first
sorted out the Nitzotzot and the Kelim from among them too.
Every thing he sorted from them was but the female parts in all
the Partzufim. It is so because in the beginning, it started to sort
out the purest among them through the Ibur Elyon.
From that Nukva de Atik was made, after the Ohr of the 248
Nitzotzin mixed with the Ohr of the Nekudat Keter that remained
in Atzilut. Also, the Kelim of the Melachim mixed with the new
Kelim of the new MA. Nukva de Atik and Atik were made of all of
that, and it follows similarly in all of them.
Ohr Pnimi
19. He first sorted out the Nitzotzot and the Kelim from among them
too.
It means that besides sorting the Orot de BON, which are the
Reshimot, he also sorts the Nitzotzin and the Kelim because by sorting
the Orot and the Reshimot, the Kelim receive their correction too. This
is so because the Reshimot correct and raise to themselves the Kelim
that are related to them.
This matter of sorting out means that he gives them from his He’arah,
as we’ve explained above. The Rosh de Eser Sefirot of the new MA

--- PAGE 652 ---
that came out by the Zivug Elyon de AB SAG clothes the place of GAR
de Nekudim, and they receive Komat Keter from him.
This is considered that the new MA sorted GAR de Nekudim and
corrected them to be Behinat Nukva to him, meaning receive his
bestowal. It is called “sorting” because each degree of the new MA
sorted precisely those parts of BON related to his degree because all
the Reshimot of BON from the GAR and ZAT rose to MAN at once
(Ohr Pnimi item 17).
The new MA sorted them gradually, one by one, meaning according to
the appearance of his own degrees. This is because when Atik de MA
was created, it sorted the better among the general MAN, meaning the
GAR de Nekudim. He added them to himself, to Behinat Nukva de
Atik, and then when AA de MA was created, it sorted the part that
belongs to his degree. He added it to himself, to his Behinat Nukva
and so on similarly. It is for this reason that it is called sorting.
The female parts in all the Partzufim.
All the males were made of the new MAN, and all the females were
made of the Orot and the Nitzotzin and the Kelim that remained of
Nekudim after the breaking of the vessels. However, in AVI and ZON
there is Hitkalelut of the BON in the males, and the Hitkalelut of MA
in the females too. This will be explained in its place.
It started to sort out the purest among them through the Ibur
Elyon.
The beginning of the sorting is during the first Zivug of the ascent of
MAN to Metzach de SAG that was in Rosh SAG itself. At that time
only Komat Malchut came out (Ohr Pnimi item 17).
Since that Koma and Ibur of the new MA had just come out, he
immediately sorted for himself the Orot, Nitzotzin and Kelim that
belong to him from the general MAN, in the same quantity and quality
of the Behinot Ibur. They rose from BYA to Atzilut and were corrected
there in the form of Gimel within Gimel, and we have already
explained that the Komat Ibur is the three Sefirot NHY.

--- PAGE 653 ---
They clothe the three Kelim Elyonim KHB because of the opposite
value between Kelim and Orot (Ohr Pnimi item 17). You find, that
now they were sorted and only the best, highest Kelim among the
Kelim and Nitzotzin that fell to BYA, meaning Kelim de KHB, rose
from BYA by the Koma de Ibur. That is the meaning of the words, “in
the beginning, it started to sort out the purest among them
through the Ibur Elyon.”
Nukva de Atik and Atik were made of all of that.
He wishes to say, ZAT de Nukva de Atik. However, GAR de Nukva de
Atik were not sorted even a little bit from the Nitzotzin and Kelim de
BYA. Rather, she is made of GAR de Nekudim from the same Behinot
that the breaking did not touch at all.
20. Aferwards, through Zivug de duchra de Atik with its Nukva, they
brought up and sorted Nitzotzot that were fallen below, the
suitable part for Nukva de Arich. They entered the place of the
Ibur as Mayin Nukvin, where they sweeten and correct by
spending the time of the Ibur, becoming Behinat Partzuf.
Ohr Pnimi
20. Through Zivug de duchra de Atik etc. the suitable part for Nukva
de Arich.
The Rav was very brief here, relying on other places. Between the
above Zivug de Ibur and the Zivug Dechura with Nukva de Atik,
between them was the Zivug de Gadlut through AB SAG. It ejected the
Hey Tata’a from the Metzach to the Peh, and Eser Sefirot de Rosh and
Guf de Atik came out on Komat Keter (Ohr Pnimi item 18).
This is so because a Zivug is not performed when the Partzuf is in
Behinat Ibur. Only after the Zivug de Gadlut de AB SAG, when Atik
and Nukva acquired Komat Keter, did they mate and sorted the Nukva
de AA. He also does not explain here how the Zachar de AA is
emanated here, for he only comes to clarify the sorting out of the
females of Atzilut, and how they are all made of the name BON.

--- PAGE 654 ---
Indeed, the matters of MA and BON, and how they connect, are
generally quite scattered in the Rav’s words, and they are also very
brief. There is a great need to gather the essentials in a single place to
make it possible to interpret all the many details that the Rav
introduces before us.
First we must understand the difference between the new MA and the
BON. Know, that the entire difference is the matter of the ascent of
Hey Tata’a. In BON, all its Kelim are from Behinat Hey Tata’a in the
Eynaim, as they so emerged at their creation, and in the new MA, all
its Kelim are considered as Behinat Hey Tata’a that rose in Galgalta.
It is so because this is how it emerged in the beginning of its creation,
and anything that comes out in a Partzuf in the beginning of its
creation never changes.
Even though it later receives additional Gadlut, the Kelim of the
Katnut do not change by that, much less multiply. Instead, the same
Kelim he had during the Katnut, in quantity and quality, grow in Koma
and Aviut during his Gadlut, and remember that.
The Zivug de Ibur of the new MA has already been explained. Its
origin is the Masach de Guf of the Nekudim that purified and rose to
Rosh de SAG. By force of its Hitkalelut in the Zivug there, it became
Av only in the measure of the Aviut of the Keter.
Hence, when it mated with the Ohr Elyon, it did not raise Ohr Hozer,
but only on Komat Malchut. This is because the last Behina he had in
Guf de Nekudim is Behina Aleph, and that disappeared with the
Hizdakchut of the Masach.
However, you should remember that Behinat Hitlabshut always
remains, even from the last Behina. Hence, here too there is Behina
Aleph de Hitlabshut. It turns out that Komat Behina Aleph, which is
Komat ZA, came out here as well. However, it is Komat Zachar,
having Zivug only in the Hitkalelut with the Nekeva, which has Aviut,
as there is no Zivug but only from Behinat Aviut (Part 6, Histaklut
Pnimit item 14).

--- PAGE 655 ---
Thus, there really is Komat ZA here, but considering the Behinat
Kelim, there are only Kelim from Komat Malchut here. For that reason
it is only named NHY, being the three Sefirot in Komat Malchut.
Nevertheless, of course there is Komat ZA there as well, being HGT,
meaning the three Sefirot thickwise from Komat ZA, but they are
clothed inside NHY. This is because this Koma comes from Reshimo
de Hitlabshut, from which there are no Kelim.
Know, that the name MA is primarily Komat ZA because Komat
Malchut is never called by the name MA. Hence, MA is always
considered half of the Partzuf of the Zachar. Because there is no
Zivug from its own Behina, as there is only Behinat Hitlabshut in it, it
cannot be corrected except by joining and mixing with the Aviut of the
Behinat Nekeva. Thus we have explained the Zachar and Nekeva from
the Behinat new MA itself, being the Reshimo de Behina Aleph de
Hitlabshut and the Behinat Hey Tata’a in Galgalta, which is Komat
Malchut from the Behinat Aviut.
We might ask: “How then is there Behinat MA in all the Partzufim,
since MA is only Behinat Hitlabshut, unfit for Zivug with the Ohr
Elyon? For that reason it joins with the Aviut in the Reshimot of Kelim
de BON. That is also the reason that BON is considered the Nekeva of
MA, since his own Nukva operates only in Rosh de RADLA, which is
the first Rosh of the new MA. From there downward it takes the
Reshimot de Aviut of the BON for itself, as its Behinat Nukva, and
remember that.
However, we have already explained that the MA of the first Rosh,
though it too has its own Behinat Malchut there, it still sorted GAR de
BON for itself as Behinat Nukva. Indeed, that Zivug is very hidden,
and there are also doubts regarding the Behinot of Nukva there, and
this is not the place to elaborate on them. I have already explained the
doubts in my commentary on the Tree of Life “Panim Meirot and
Panim Masbirot”, and study it there.
There is a very important rudiment to know here: The Nekeva of the
above new MA, which is its Malchut, remains concealed in Rosh de

--- PAGE 656 ---
Atik. However, she does not appear at all in all the Partzufim below
Atik.
Know also, that the Hey Tata’a, concealed in the above Rosh de Atik,
manifests in the two bottom thirds of Netzah and Hod de Atik, though
because of that they went out of Atzilut as Dadei Behema. However, it
does not appear in the entire Atzilut, but only from her Behinat
He’arah, and nothing of her Behinat Atzmut.
The primary difference between Kelim de MA and Kelim de BON is
during the Katnut, meaning in the Ibur. On the part of the Kelim de
BON, there should be a complete Behinat ZA even in Behinat Ibur,
meaning three Kavim HGT and three Kavim NHY. This is because the
Katnut de BON is Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, leaving two Kelim in the
Behinat Atzilut of all the degrees, which are Keter and Hochma, and
ejects Bina and ZON to Behinat BYA.
Hence, each Partzuf has two Orot Ruach Nefesh, clothing two Kelim
Keter and Hochma. However, on the part of the Kelim de MA, where
the Hey Tata’a rose in Keter, only one Sefira remained in the Atzilut
of all the degrees, namely Sefirat Keter. The lower nine of all the
degrees went outside the degree.
For that reason there is only Behinat ZA de Hitlabshut in the Zivug of
the Katnut, which is Behinat HGT, but it has no Kelim, while Komat
Malchut de Aviut does have Kelim. Thus, HGT must clothe inside
NHY, meaning in Kelim de Komat Malchut.
From this explanation you will understand the difference between
GAR de Atzilut and ZON de Atzilut. In GAR de Atzilut there are only
two Zivugim: Zivug de Katnut, called Ibur, and Zivug de Gadlut,
though in ZA there are three Zivugim: Ibur, Yenika, Mochin.
The reason is that there is a great difference between the Nukvin (pl.
for Nukva) of the two Partzufim Atik and AA, and the Nukvin de AVI
and ZON. The Nukvin de Atik and AA are from Behinat Keter de
Nekudim where the breaking did not strike at all. For that reason they
were left with all the Ohr from the Eser Sefirot that extended to them

--- PAGE 657 ---
from the Nikvey Eynaim de SAG, meaning the entire measure that
came out during the Katnut de Nekudim.
It thus follows, that during the Zivug de Atik and Nukva to generate
Behinat Katnut de AA, called Ibur, it is born out of there complete, in
Komat ZA, which are Orot de Ruach Nefesh in Kelim de HGT NHY.
The Zachar de Atik is Behinat MA, and there are no Kelim in his HGT
since he is considered ZA of Hitlabshut. Yet, through its stay in
Behinat Me’i (intestine) de Nukva de Atik, where her Katnut is also
from the Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey Eynaim, he acquires the Kelim de
HGT operating in the Nikvey Eynaim.
Thus, even the first Zivug of Katnut de Atik and Nukva brought out
Partzuf de AA, complete in Komat ZA in Kelim de HGT and Kelim de
NHY. Similarly, when AA and Nukva mated for the Katnut de AVI,
called Ibur, they too were born in Komat ZA, complete.
This is so because Nukva de ZA too does not need her Zachar in the
Behinat Zivug de Katnut, since she is Behinat Keter de Nekudim.
Hence she gave AVI the Kelim de HGT from the Behinat Hey Tata’a in
the Eynaim, and AVI came out in complete Kelim de HGT and NHY.
However, they lack GAR, for which they rose a second time for MAN,
for Zivug de Gadlut, where Atik and Nukva emanated the GAR at one
time for AA. Also, AA and Nukva mated and emanated GAR to AVI. It
turns out that they were completed in two Zivugim.
It is not so with ZA because the Nukva is not complete in AVI, even
from the Behinat Katnut de BON. Hence, even the Behinat Katnut de
BON needs to receive from her Zachar from the Behinat MA.
It turns out that the Zivug de AVI de Katnut for the Ibur de ZON was in
Ibur by the force of MA. Since MA is only Komat ZA of Behinat
Hitlabshut, and in Behinat Aviut it has only Komat Malchut, it
therefore has only Kelim de NHY. As a result, Komat HGT must clothe
inside NHY.
Because of that ZA is born only on Komat NHY, where the Behinot
HGT is clothed in it, and it has only Kelim de MA, which are Komat

--- PAGE 658 ---
Malchut, where it is divided into NHY by Tikun Kavim.
Hence, it needs Zivug de Yenika in order to be completed with Kelim
for HGT. It is so because through Yenika from its mother’s milk it
acquires the Behinat Kelim from the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, as it is
written, “His eyes are washed with milk, and fitly set.”
It acquires Kelim de HGT through this Zivug, and then Komat ZA is
fully completed in Behinat Nefesh Ruach in it. Ruach clothes the
Kelim de NHY, and in order to acquire GAR too, it needs to rise to
MAN for a second Ibur de Mochin. Then AVI mate in Behinat Gadlut,
and give him Mochin de GAR, and he is then fully completed.
Thus, ZA is not completed before it undergoes three Zivugim: Ibur
Aleph for Gimel within Gimel, meaning HGT inside NHY, because it
only has Kelim from the side of MA at that time. Then Zivug de
Yenika, by which it acquires Kelim from the part of BON, from the
Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, at which time it acquires Kelim de HGT,
and HGT expand from within the NHY as they already have Kelim.
After that, Ibur Bet de Mochin, when it acquires its GAR.
However, GAR de Atzilut, which are AA and AVI, do not need a Zivug
de Yenika, since they acquire Kelim de BON from the Zivug de Ibur
Aleph too. This is because Nukva de Elyon has complete Orot de BON
from the Behinat Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, and does not need the
Behinat Zachar de MA for that.
Consequently, as soon as they are born, they have complete Kelim for
HGT and NHY. However, they need Ibur Bet de Mochin. Thus, they
do not need more than two Zivugim, which are Ibur Aleph de Katnut
and Ibur Bet for Mochin.
Now we come to the essence of the Rav’s words here. He says: “in
the beginning, it started to sort out the purest among them
through the Ibur Elyon. From that Nukva de Atik was made.” It
means the first raising of MAN where all the Behinot of Achoraim de
AVI and YESHSUT and the seven Orot of the seven Melachim rose,
being that they were all contained in the Masach de Nekudim that
purified and rose to Behinat Masach de Rosh SAG (Ohr Pnimi item 2).

--- PAGE 659 ---
Then, Behinat Katnut of Atik and its Nukva came out there because
Behinot BON too, contained in the Masach that rose, joined with this
new Zivug, but with the better parts in them, which is Behinat Keter
de BON. After that Atik and Nukva rose to MAN to Behinat Zivug Bet
de Gadlut, to Rosh de SAG.
In that state the Rosh de SAG mated with AB, which are the Mochin.
The He’arat AB lowers the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim of Rosh SAG
to the Peh, like the place of the Zivug which occurs in AB itself. The
Komat Keter emerges, Atik and Nukva come down to their place and
produce Eser Sefirot from below upward in Komat Keter for their
Behinat Rosh.
Then they expand from above downward to their Behinot Guf as well.
However, we should remember that their Behinot Katnut, which came
out in the first Zivug, still haven’t changed in them. This is because
any Eser Sefirot of this Rosh and Guf expanded in the first Kli de
Keter that they had during the Katnut. From Bina de Keter upward,
Eser Sefirot de Rosh on Komat Keter came out. From Bina down, Eser
Sefirot de Guf came out.
Thus, Kli de Keter, which was but a single Nekuda before, now
expanded into a complete Partzuf, Rosh and Guf, through the Sium of
the Atzilut.
It is written, “Aferwards, through Zivug de duchra de Atik with its
Nukva, they brought up and sorted Nitzotzot that were fallen
below, from the suitable part for Nukva de Arich Anpin. They
entered the place of the Ibur as MAN, becoming Behinat Partzuf.”
Interpretation: It is known that all the MAN in general that belong to
all four Olamot ABYA rose together as Reshimot incorporated in the
Masach, up to Rosh de SAG. However, each Partzuf took only what
relates to its own Behina, and left the rest for its following Partzuf.
The second Partzuf also took the Behinat MAN from that entirety that
belongs to its degree, and left the rest for the Partzuf that follows it,
and so did all the degrees through the end of Assiya.

--- PAGE 660 ---
We have already explained the two Behinot MAN that Rosh de SAG
sorted for the two Zivugim de Katnut and Gadlut de Atik and Nukva.
He left all that remains in the general MAN to the sorts of Atik and its
Nukva, for AA and its Nukva.
First, Atik sorted the Behinat MAN relating to the Zivug de Katnut de
AA and Nukva, which is for their very creation, because the essence of
the Partzuf is from the Zivug de Katnut. Conversely, the Zivug de
Gadlut is not the essence in any Partzuf; it is considered as mere
addition, being in the Partzuf intermittently, not permanently.
Hence, the Partzufim of Atzilut come out in two Zivugim, even the
GAR among them. The reason for it has already been explained in
previous parts, which is by the ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim
through the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din.
Consequently, in the Partzufim of Nekudim the Hey Tata’a came out
permanently. Here in Atzilut, however, the Hey Tata’a came out at the
Metzach permanently, but it is permanently associated with the
Behinat Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim.
Know, that this addition that was made here is the cause for this entire
correction. Because the breaking that occurred in Nekudim due to the
Parsa’s weakness, when the new Ohr of Gadlut fissured the Parsa,
the Parsa no longer had the strength to refrain from expanding the
He’arah to the Separated Olamot BYA too. Thus, Tzimtzum Bet was
revoked entirely.
Now, however, through the ascent of the Hey Tata’a to the Metzach,
the Parsa received great strength from the Keter, which is the Shoresh
of every Partzuf. Hence, the Parsa covered and fortified so that even
during the Zivug de Gadlut, when a new Ohr comes and fissures the
force of the Parsa, that new Ohr still does not shine below Parsa de
BYA. It follows that now there is subsistence for the Gadlut, as it does
not revoke the Katnut. This will be explained below.
After AA and its Nukva came out in Behinat Katnut, AA returned and
rose to MAN to Atik and Nukva. Then Atik and Nukva sorted the MAN

--- PAGE 661 ---
from the collective that SAG left them for AA, meaning Behina Gimel
de Aviut in the general MAN.
At that time there was a Zivug in Atik and Nukva, and Eser Sefirot
came out in Komat Hochma. This Koma is considered Behinat MA,
for the rule is that all the Komot that came out anew are considered
HaVaYaH de MA de Alephin. That AA de MA sorted for it the bottom
half of Keter de Nekudim, which became its Behinat Nukva as he
gives her his Komat Hochma.
Atik gave the remainder of the MAN after Komat AA to AA and his
Nukva. They sorted form them the MAN that relates to AVI de MA,
meaning to the two Zivugim de Katnut and Gadlut that first sorted the
MAN that relates to the Katnut de AVI. Thus, AVI were born in Komat
ZA.
Afterwards, AVI rose to MAN to AA and Nukva, and they sorted the
MAN de Behina Bet and generated Eser Sefirot in Komat Bina. AVI de
MA descended to their place and dressed HGT de AA, while sorting
ZAT de Hochma and Bina de BON for their Behinat Nukva.
AA left the remains of the MAN after the sorts to AVI, which in turn,
sorted out the MAN that relates to ZON. First, they sorted the MAN
that belongs to Katnut, mated on the MAN and generated Katnut de
ZON, which is Komat NHY and HGT within it.
After that they descended for Zivug de Yenika and were completed in
Komat HGT too. They came down and clothed below Tabur de AA,
and AVI left for ZON the remains left after the sorts of ZON.
They, in turn, sorted them form Partzuf Atik de Beria in the same
above manner, Atik for AA and so on likewise as in the five Partzufim
of Atzilut. Also, ZON de Beria sorted from the remains of the general
MAN that AVI de Beria left for them for Atik of Olam ha Yetzira. Atik
sorted for AA etc. until ZON de Yetzira. ZON de Yetzira sorted for Atik
de Assiya; Atik de Assiya for AA de Assiya etc. until ZON de Assiya
were sorted in AVI de Assiya.

--- PAGE 662 ---
The rest of the sorts of ZON de Assiya are already considered
complete Sigim, unfit to join Kedusha. For that reason they fell to the
Klipot, from which ABYA de Klipot were constructed.
However, many Nitzotzin of Kedusha remained in them, even of the
more important among them. They are sorted by the souls of the
righteous in each generation until the end of correction.
When all the sorts are through, the construction of ABYA de Klipot
will fall down, for their entire sustenance will have been sucked out,
being the Nitzotzin suitable for Kedusha. Then it will be said, “He will
swallow up death for ever.”
21. Similarly, Arich sorted for Nukva de AVI, and AVI for ZON, the
entire Behinat Malchut in them. This is why they are called
Melachim, because all the Malchuiot (pl. for Malchut) were made
of them.
Similarly, in every Eser Sefirot themselves in each and every
Partzuf, they were sorted in the above-mentioned order. What
could not be sorted and rise in Olam ha Atzilut, even for the
bottom Nukva de ZA, remained in Beria.
Afterwards, all the parts of Beria were made of them, with its
entire order of degrees. The Nitzotzot of Beria cannot be sorted by
AVI de Atzilut since they cannot ascend above ZON, though they
are sorted out in the Beten of Nukva de ZA through he Zivug with
ZA.
22. There too it sorts only Behinat Atik de Beria. Atik de Beria is
sorted there. AVI de Beria are sorted in Arich, and likewise always
because it is impossible for any part to be sorted above the place
of its degree, neither in place and nor in time. Instead, they follow
one another, both in the order of degrees, and in the order of their
time of correction. This is explained sufficiently.
23. *Only the Behina of the apparent Malchut is not in AA, but in its
Ateret Yesod. It is so because all that is Dechura, but there is no
actual Nukva. In Atik Yomin too there is no Nukva in itself, only

--- PAGE 663 ---
the Ateret Yesod de Atik is Nukva, as in AA. However, afterwards,
Malchut appears from that Upper most Reisha de Lo Etyada,
called Atik Yomin, who is above all these nine Sefirot de AA.
Ohr Pnimi
23. Only the Behina of the apparent Malchut is not in AA etc. …In
Atik Yomin too.
As we have explained above (Ohr Pnimi item 20), the Hey Tata’a de
MA was concealed in Rosh de Atik, and her Atzmut does not appear in
the entire Atzilut.
Malchut appears from that Upper most Reisha de Lo Etyada.
It is called Rosh de Atik Yomin, which is the first Rosh of Atzilut, and
where the Hey Tata’a was concealed. Her He’arah appears in Malchut
of Olam ha Atzilut, meaning in Malchut that became a complete
Partzuf for Nukva de ZA.
24. This is the meaning of “A virtuous woman is a crown to her
husband.” In the end of days, she will be greater than the sun, and
this is the meaning of “became the chief corner-stone.”
When Malchut appears below, she appears from that Reisha de Lo
Etyada. This matter will clarify for you how every Behinat
Malchut of the Upper Olam herself becomes the Behinat Atik of
the Olam below it. It turns out, that the nine Sefirot are of AA, and
the Upper Reisha de Lo Etyada above all, is the Behinat Atik.
Ohr Pnimi
24. This is the meaning of “A virtuous woman is a crown to her
husband.” In the end of days, she will be greater than the sun, and
this is the meaning of “became the chief corner-stone.”
This relates to the concealed Malchut in Rosh de Atik Yomin. She does
not appear in her Atzmut, but only when all the Makifim de Atzilut
enter into Behinot inner Orot in her lower nine, being the lower nine
of Rosh and Guf de AA with his four Malbushim, which are AVI and
ZON.

--- PAGE 664 ---
Afterwards, the hidden Malchut in Rosh de Atik appears, as it says,
“she became the chief corner-stone,” being Rosh ha Aleph, and all the
Olamot de ABYA are her upshots.
It is written, “the nine Sefirot are of AA, and the Upper Reisha de
Lo Etyada above all, is the Behinat Atik.” This means that AA and all
its four dresses, AVI and ZON, are considered Hitpashtut of her nine
lower Sefirot, while she is Keter to them.
Malchut of the Upper Olam herself becomes the Behinat Atik of
the Olam below it.
All the Sefirot de Tachton are influenced by the Elyon through a
Masach. They are greatly lessened by the Masach they travel through,
except Malchut of the Elyon, which does not travel through the
Masach but fissures the Masach and passes to the Tachton (see Part 3,
Chap 7, item 1).
25. *Regard AA and Atik. The Zachar took the entire MA, and the
Nukva took the entire BON, since she is corrected and does not
need him. However, from AVI onward the males had to first take
the BON of the Nekeva, even the Katnut in her, in order to correct
it. Afterwards they were given to her entirely and its Shoresh from
the Katnut remained in them.
In Gadlut, he takes both his and hers and the BON is given to her
Partzuf alone, while the MA, only its He’arah, which is He’arat
Hassadim, but not the gist, since the gist remains in him.
It is the opposite in BON, because his gist is in her, with only
He’arah. Yet, since he took it first, he has a large Shoresh from it,
and thus his Daat is complete. However, the Nekeva takes only the
He’arah from MA, and her gist is from BON, hence her Daat is
small, even in Gadlut.
Ohr Pnimi
25. Regard AA and Atik. The Zachar took the entire MA, and the
Nukva took the entire BON.

--- PAGE 665 ---
The Zachar de Atik is Komat Keter that came out on the Hey Tata’a
that descended from the Metzach to the Peh. This is the new MA
because all the Orot that came out by Zivugim in Olam Atzilut are
called HaVaYaH de MA. Also, all the Orot and the Kelim, whose Zivug
was made in Olam ha Nekudim are called HaVaYaH de BON.
Hence, Nekudat Keter of Olam ha Nekudim, whose Upper half was
taken by Atik into his Behinat Nukva is considered HaVaYaH de BON.
Thus, the Zachar is only MA and the Nekeva is only BON.
Similarly, the Zachar de AA is Komat Hochma that came out on the
Behina Gimel in Olam Atzilut, hence it is MA. His Nekeva is the
bottom half de Nekudat Keter of Olam ha Nekudim, hence it is all
BON.
Since she is corrected and does not need him.
This means that the episode of the breaking of the vessels did not
concern Sefirat Keter de Nekudim at all; she has all the Ohr that came
out with her when she was first created. For that reason she is
corrected in herself and does not need MA to correct her.
With regard to the Zivug de Katnut, she does not even need to receive
Ohr from the new MA, since her Ohr is more important than the MA,
as she is from Behinat Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim (Ohr Pnimi item 20).
However, she receives her GAR from MA in terms of her Gadlut.
From AVI onward the males had to first take the BON of the
Nekeva, even the Katnut in her, in order to correct it.
Since there was an annulment in their Achoraim due to the breaking of
the vessels, hence, even when they are in a state of Zivug de Katnut,
the BON needs the correction of the new Ohr de Katnut of MA. Thus,
before it comes to the Partzuf Nekeva, the BON had to connect with
the Zachar inside its Kelim de MA, to correct and complete it.
Afterwards the Zachar gives the BON to the Kelim of the Nekeva, and
the Zachar is regarded as the Behinat Elyon of the Nekeva, even
during the Katnut.

--- PAGE 666 ---
Thus, the Shoresh of BON is regarded as remaining in the Zachar,
while only a branch of it departs to the Nekeva. It is known in every
Elyon and Tachton that although the Ohr relates entirely to the
Tachton, since it passes through the Elyon, the gist of the Ohr remains
in the Elyon, and only a branch of it is poured on to the Tachton.
Its Shoresh from the Katnut remained in them.
This means that a Shoresh of BON remains in the males since they
first received it during the Katnut. Hence, though they later gave it to
their Nukva, the gist of the Ohr remains in the males, as we have said
above.
The MA, only its He’arah etc. but not the gist, since the gist
remains in him.
This means that there is Hitkalelut of the Nekeva in the Zachar here.
Because BON first comes to the Zachar, it is mingled with the MA in
the Zachar. Thus, BON receives the He’arah of MA. Afterwards,
when poured on to the Kelim de Nekeva, there is also Behinat Orot de
MA to the Kelim de Nekeva, though the gist in her is the name BON.
In the Zachar, however, it is the opposite. This is because the gist in
him are the Orot de MA, and BON that he took due to the Hitkalelut of
the Nekeva in him is only considered He’arah in him, not the gist.
His Daat is complete etc. However, the Nekeva etc. her Daat is
small, even in Gadlut.
The Zachar has complete Hassadim and Gevurot since Hassadim are
from MA and the Gevurot are from BON. Since the Shoresh of BON
remains in the Zachar too, the HG in his Daat are also complete.
However, the Nekeva does not have from the Atzmut of MA, being the
Hassadim in Daat, but only a He’arah, hence her Daat is small.
26. This entire MA and BON de Gadlut is called “the departing
addition”. None of it remains but the BON de Katnut in both. This
is in ZON. However, the MA and BON always remain in AVI, since
they already had complete BON there at the time of the Melachim,
in all ten Sefirot.

--- PAGE 667 ---
Nonetheless, they too needed the MA and BON in the above way
as in ZON, where the gist of the MA is in the Zachar, and its
He’arah is in the Nukva. It is the opposite in BON because HB are
only from Bina de MA, and their Shoresh is Dinim and not
Rachamim, though they are MA.
Ohr Pnimi
26. MA and BON de Gadlut is called “the departing addition”.
Only what came out in the beginning of Atzilut is considered the
Etzem of the Partzuf, meaning the Behinat Katnut in it. However,
what it attains afterwards by new Zivugim is regarded as additions to
its basic structure, and can depart from it.
None of it remains but the BON de Katnut in both. This is in ZON.
It seems that we should say “MA and BON in Katnut” since the Katnut
is primarily the MA, and even the BON is rooted in MA and needs it.
We must insist and sustain the version, and interpret that he calls MA
de Katnut by the name “BON”. This is because the Yenika that
manifests the Kelim de HGT comes from Behinat BON, from Behinat
Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim (see Ohr Pnimi item 20). Because this
Behinat BON is higher than MA, he names the entire VAK “BON”.
Thus, the Behinot Ibur and Yenika de ZA are considered the very
creation of ZON, namely the Orot of Nefesh, clothed in Kelim de Ibur,
and the Orot de Ruach, clothed in Kelim de Yenika. However, Zivug de
Gadlut de MA and BON, which are Behinot GAR, even if they are
GAR de Neshama, they are considered additions, and depart when
there is cause for Histalkut.
In AVI, since they already had complete BON there at the time of
the Melachim, in all ten Sefirot.
Meaning MA and BON de Gadlut because MA and BON de Katnut
remain even in ZON. This is because they already had complete BON
in the time of the Melachim from Behinat GAR too. It means that the
matter of the annulment of the Achoraim in them was not because of
themselves, but because of the sons, being ZAT.

--- PAGE 668 ---
Hence, after the BON was erected once more in Behinat GAR, it is
considered the Etzem of their creation. The rule is that anything that
comes out complete in Olam ha Nekudim is considered the Etzem
(essence) of the Partzuf here in Olam Atzilut. Since it was erected
once, it never again departs.
The Achoraim of AVI de Nekudim were cancelled and they returned to
being Achor be Achor there. Yet, as it was not because of them, they
are considered whole. Hence, once they were corrected in Atzilut in
Behinat Panim be Panim, they never return to Achor be Achor, as the
Rav said in several places.
Nonetheless, they too needed the MA and BON in the above way
as in ZON.
During the Melachim there was complete BON of Eser Sefirot in
them, which helped them that MA and BON de Gadlut would not
depart from them. However, since there was the cancellation of the
Achoraim in them before they were corrected, they needed sweetening
and correction from the MA. Before it clothes in the Kelim of the
Nekeva, it must first connect with the MA, as it is in ZON. For that
reason there is MA and BON in the Zachar, and MA and BON in the
Nekeva.
Their Shoresh is Dinim and not Rachamim, though they are MA.
It means that the Shoresh of the Dinim is there, since “Dinim fall from
Bina” in the form of Butzina de Kardinuta, concealed in the Me’i de
Bina.
27. *This clarifies the connection of the name MA, the new Ohr, with
the name SAG. Now it is called BON, being the sorts of the seven
Melachim with the Achoraim de AVI too. This became Zachar and
that became Nukva.
Ohr Pnimi
27. BON, being the sorts of the seven Melachim with the Achoraim de
AVI.

--- PAGE 669 ---
Meaning from AA downward, as well as in the lower seven de Atik.
However, GAR de Atik do not have any Achoraim de Keter in them,
much less of ZAT de Nekudim.
28. We shall explain the division of the name MA. It is known that the
Yod Sefirot de Atzilut are divided into five Partzufim. However,
Partzuf de Arich is divided into another two, namely Atik and
Arich.
It is known that the Taamim are in Keter, the Nekudot, in Hochma,
the Tagin in Bina, and the Otiot in the bottom seven, as it is
mentioned in the Tikkunim. So they are precisely in the division of
the Eser Sefirot, whether in AB, SAG, MA or BON.
However, the Yod Sefirot de Atzilut made of these connections of
MA and BON do not take them in this order.
Ohr Pnimi
28. The Yod Sefirot de Atzilut are divided into five Partzufim.
This is according to the five known Behinot: Komat Keter comes out
on Masach de Behina Dalet, Komat Hochma on Masach de Behina
Gimel, Komat Bina on Masach de Behina Bet, Komat ZA on Masach
de Behina Aleph, and Komat Malchut on Masach de Behinat Keter.
You already know that Komat ZA that comes out on Behina Aleph
consists of six Sefirot HGT NHY, hence the above five Komot are
regarded as Eser Sefirot.
The Yod Sefirot de Atzilut made of these connections of MA and
BON do not take them in this order.
It is so because of the difference between MA and BON. These five
Komot that came out in Atzilut are called the new MA, since any
Hidush Ohr that came out in Atzilut in addition to the Orot BON that
were already in the Kelim during the seven Melachim, are called “the
new MA. Also, the old Orot that were during the Melachim are named
BON.
However, you must understand that all the Orot of the above five
Komot that came out on the five Behinot in the Masach in Atzilut

--- PAGE 670 ---
itself, are regarded according to the new MA. However, each and
every Koma de MA takes for itself a single Sefira from BON to be her
Behinat Nekeva. There are changes in them since Keter de BON is
divided into two; its Upper half connects to Komat Keter de MA, and
its bottom half connects to Komat Hochma de MA, and some more
changes.
Hence, the Partzufim of Atzilut are found to be not very accurate in
their order of Komot since the Behinot BON in the Partzuf must also
be taken into consideration.
29. Indeed, Atik and Arich, called Keter de Atzilut, take the two
Behinot of the name MA between them, which are Taamim – Keter,
and Nekudot – Hochma. This is because each Dechura side of Atik
is made of Keter, being Taamim de MA, and each Dechura side of
Arich is made of Hochma, being Nekudot de MA. Thus, only Keter
de Atzilut, which is Behinat Atik and Arich, takes the Keter and
Hochma of MA to the Dechura side of them, and only the both of
them are called Keter de Atzilut.
Ohr Pnimi
29. Atik and Arich, called Keter de Atzilut, take the two Behinot of the
name MA between them.
MA is primarily in order to correct the BON. Hence, we name the
Partzufim according to their relation to the MA, since it is their
Behinat Zachar. It means that all the Ohr, poured in the Partzufim, is
the Behinat MA, and thus it naturally controls their order.
In light of that, since Atik and Arich are both Behinat Keter of the
Nekudim, they are also considered as Keter de Atzilut. Their state is
necessarily according to how they relate to MA. Keter de MA is the
Behinat Zachar de Atik, and Hochma de MA is the Behinat Zachar of
AA.
It has already been explained that because of the ascent of the Hey
Tata’a to the Keter, Hochma too departed from the Behinat Rosh de
Keter. Hence, Partzuf AA relates to Partzuf Atik like a Guf, as it is

--- PAGE 671 ---
Hochma de MA, clothing the Guf de Atik, though with regard to BON,
they are both Keter. This is for the above reason that the situations are
controlled by MA, as it is the owner of the Ohr in the Partzufim.
Keter and Hochma of MA to the Dechura side of them.
We must thoroughly understand that great change that was made here:
The Zachar and the Nekeva of a single Partzuf, which are necessarily
on the same degree, are compelled to be from two Sefirot. Moreover,
the Zachar is to be from Sefirat Hochma and the Nekeva from Sefirat
Keter. There is also, the matter of the division of the Sefirat Keter
between the two Partzufim and why Atik did not take the bottom half
of Sefirat Keter de BON too.
First, we shall explain why all three Roshim of Nekudim in Zivug de
Gadlut in AVI de Nekudim, connected to AVI to be as Eser Sefirot de
Rosh in Komat Keter, while here in the new MA it was not so.
Moreover, in its Zivug de Gadlut, the Hey Tata’a came out from the
Metzach and returned to her place in the Peh by He’arat AB, and the
Eser Sefirot came out in Komat Keter. However, it only helped Sefirat
Keter, and all other bottom nine Sefirot did not return to the Rosh.
Furthermore, they did not receive anything from the Zivug.
The Rav writes that when Atik was corrected, it was not corrected
from what is below Atik at all. Also, when AA was corrected, it was
not corrected from what is below it whatsoever, and likewise with AVI
and likewise ZON.
You already know the Shoresh of the new MA. It is the Masach de Guf
de Nekudim that raised the Reshimot of the seven Melachim and the
four Achoraim de AVI and YESHSUT and the Achoraim of NHY de
Keter. It brought them to Rosh de SAG, to the Behinat Metzach, which
is Behinat Bina de Galgalta de SAG. Komat ZA de Hitlabshut came
out on it, and Komat Malchut de Aviut from Bina de Keter and above
(Ohr Pnimi item 20).
Since the place of the Zivug is Bina de Keter, they received Behinat
Achoraim de Bina there and were corrected Achor be Achor in the
form of Tikun Kavim, called Gimel Go (within) Gimel. This is so

--- PAGE 672 ---
because there is only Komat Malchut de Aviut here, and thus there is
only Komat NHY here. Komat HGT that departed is but Behinat
Hitlabshut and has no Kelim, and this is called Gimel Go Gimel, or
Behinat Ibur.
Only the Ketarim were made of this Komat Ibur in all the Reshimot
that rose to MAN there, and not all the Eser Sefirot in Keter, but only
from Bina upward. This is because the He’arat Achoraim de Bina in
them did not let them expand to ZON since the force of the Achoraim
de Bina is only before it expands to He’arat ZON.
However, when she expands to He’arat ZON she is compelled to
arrest her Achoraim and mate in Hochma, receive He’arat Hochma
from him for the ZON (Part 7, Ohr Pnimi item 24). Thus, ZON is in
the same situation here as ZAT de Nekudim, where the He’arat Rosh
did not reach them because of the He’arat Achoraim de AVI.
You find, that besides Hochma leaving the Behinat Rosh into Behinat
Guf, ZON de Keter itself also departed from Behinat Rosh into
Behinat Guf, since the Hey Tata’a stands in Bina de Keter. Even the
He’arah of Gimel Go Gimel did not reach them.
There is yet another matter here in the new MA. Since Hey Tata’a rose
to Keter, Parsa was greatly strengthened, since as long as Parsa was
in Behinat Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim she did not have the strength to
exist during the Zivug de Gadlut de AB SAG too. This is so because
the new Ohr de Zivug AB SAG descended and lowered the Hey Tata’a
from the Eynaim to the Peh, fissured the Parsa, and illuminated in
Nekudim. Consequently, the Parsa did not have the strength to detain
the Ohr from expanding to BYA, and this is the reason for the
breaking.
Now that the force of Parsa has been doubled by the Hey Tata’a that
rose to Keter, she was greatly strengthened. Thus, even the Zivug de
Gadlut, which lowers the Hey Tata’a from the Metzach to the Peh
does not cancel the Gevul de Katnut of Parsa in any way. On the
contrary, the Kelim only grow.

--- PAGE 673 ---
Thus, the new Ohr that descended from the Zivug de AB SAG and
lowered the Hey Tata’a from the Metzach to the Peh, and the Eser
Sefirot de Rosh de Atik that came out in Komat Keter, were also not
cancelled by that ancient Gevul de Katnut.
ZON de Keter did not return to the Rosh, but by receiving the Koma of
the Rosh from above downward, the Kelim grew in a way that HGT de
Guf became KHB, NHY into HGT, and new NHY emerged for them.
However, they remained in Behinat Guf, and the form of Rosh did not
return on them, as in AVI de Nekudim.
Hence, even though Atik was corrected in a complete Koma de Eser
Sefirot through Keter, still, none of it reached Partzuf AA. This is
because even its own Guf did not return to Behinat Rosh, much less
the rest of the bottom nine Sefirot.
Therefore, this entire Koma de Keter came out and expanded only on
the single Sefira of Keter, and the rest of the Sefirot did not receive
anything from it. It was likewise in Sefirat Hochma, which expanded
in itself by the two Zivugim Katnut and Gadlut, into RTS, and none of
it reached Bina at all, etc. similarly.
Now you will understand that these Eser Sefirot in Komat Keter that
came out in the Koma de Histaklut Eynaim of AVI contain within them
all the other Komot that came out in Nekudim. They come here in the
new MA one-by-one in five special Zivugim, meaning a special Sefira
in each Koma, as has been explained above.
It is also not on an equal Koma as it was in Histaklut Eynaim de AVI,
but one below the other: Komat Keter came out only in Atik, Komat
Hochma came out in AA, Komat Bina in AVI, and Komat ZA in ZON.
This is so because each Tachton comes out from the Behinat Guf de
Elyon since the Hey Tata’a is above it.
It turns out that Komat AA is considered Behinat Guf with regard to
Keter, and is not considered as Rosh, but only with regard to Sefirat
Hochma. Thus, AA lacks the Behinot GAR de Yechida because it is
considered Guf with regard to the Ohr de Yechida.

--- PAGE 674 ---
Also, AVI are considered Guf with regard to AA, which is Hochma.
They are only considered Rosh with regard to the new Zivug made on
the Masach de Behina Bet, which is Bina.
Nevertheless, all three Partzufim Atik, AA and AVI, are considered
complete Partzufim in Rosh and Guf. AA still has Rosh and GAR from
the new Zivug de Behina Gimel; AVI have Rosh and GAR from the
new Zivug de Behina Bet. It is like the Partzufim GASMB de AK
where each Tachton is a Guf to the Elyon, though it has complete Rosh
in itself.
However, since ZON came out only on Komat ZA, which is Nefesh
Ruach, hence they lack the GAR entirely, and came out as Behinat Guf
without a Rosh. Examine the great lessening that occurred because of
the ascent of the Hey Tata’a to the Metzach: Not only did it divide the
Sefirot and each and every Sefira came out in its own Koma, they also
came out one below the other, until it caused ZA to come out without a
Rosh.
However, through the new Ohr that descended from the Zivug de AB
SAG in Nekudim, Eser Sefirot KHB ZON came out in AVI, and all their
Komot were equal up to Keter, even the Malchut in them.
In addition, we must remember that there is a great difference between
the Kelim de GAR of the Nekudim and the Kelim de ZAT de Nekudim.
The Kelim de GAR are from Behinat First Hey, and have none of the
Behinat Hey Tata’a.
Those Kelim came out by He’arat NHY de AK through the Tabur, by
which the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim came down to Peh of the
Nekudim and AVI returned to Behinat Rosh. However, because Ima
wants Hassadim, she still does not return her Panim to Abba to
receive Hochma, except by MAN. These GAR are from the Behinat
Kelim de AVI, which have no Behinat Hey Tata’a (Part 6, Histaklut
Pnimit item 9).
However, the Kelim de ZAT came out by the MAN de Vav and Nekuda
from the Yesod de AK. These MAN returned to AVI Panim be Panim,

--- PAGE 675 ---
mated on the MAN, and generated Komat Eser Sefirot from below
upward in Komat Keter, called Histaklut Eynaim de AVI.
From there downward it ejected the seven Melachim: First, Melech ha
Daat; after the Hizdakchut to Behina Gimel they ejected Melech ha
Hesed etc. Hence, only the Koma from below upward that emerged by
the MAN de Yesod de AK is considered as Behinat Rosh de ZON, but
not the Komot that emerged before the MAN, in the form of Panim be
Achor. It is so since they have connection with ZON as they do not
have any part in the Behinat Hey Tata’a.
It turns that those Eser Sefirot that departed to AVI de Nekudim in
Komat Keter should be divided between the GAR in them, which have
no connection with ZON, and the ZON in them, considered Rosh of
ZAT de Nekudim. Now you see that these first three Partzufim Atik, AA
and AVI that came out in Nekudim, are not connected with ZON de
Atzilut any longer since they are from the Behinat GAR in the Roshim
of AVI de Nekudim.
You can therefore understand that there are three Behinot in the Eser
Sefirot de Nekudim, and there is a great difference in the way the are
corrected:
• The first Behina is the Behinat Katnut that emerged in Nekudim by
the ascent of Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, meaning what emerged in
their basic creation, being only Behinat Achor be Achor.
• The second is Behinat Panim be Achor that came out in Nekudim
by the He’arat Tabur de AK that lowered the Hey Tata’a from the
Eynaim de Keter de Nekudim to the Peh de Nekudim. It returned
the AVI to the Rosh, where Ima still remains in the Achoraim to
Abba though she is turned completely into Behinat Rosh,
“because He delighteth in mercy.”
The difference between the first Behina and the second Behina is that
in the first Behina where the Hey Tata’a was above AVI, AVI had only
Komat ZON. However, now they have Komat Keter since the Hey
Tata’a is in its place in the Peh.

--- PAGE 676 ---
Yet, although Ima can receive the Ohr Hochma, there is still an
imprinted yearning in her by the nature of her creation in Ohr Yashar
to want only Ohr Hassadim. Indeed, there is benefit from that to ZAT
de Nekudim, that they can now receive Behinat complete Ohr
Hassadim from Ima, being the Behinot Eser Sefirot in Komat ZA that
expand to them from Ima that returned to the Rosh.
• The third Behina is the two Roshim that came out in GAR de
Nekudim in Behinat Panim be Panim, on the MAN de Vav and
Nekuda that they received from the Yesod de AK and their Behinat
from above downward, called ZAT de Nekudim.
The best among them is the first Behina, meaning Achor be Achor that
remained in AVI de Nekudim, which did not suffer from the breaking
at all. After them it is the second Behina, meaning GAR de AVI that
came out in Behinat Panim be Achor, since they are clean from Hey
Tata’a, and the He’arat Ruach Nefesh that expanded in them to ZA is
of the same merit.
Hence, there is a great difference between the two above Behinot:
After they were corrected in Atzilut, their correction remained
permanent and the blemish of the Tachtonim does not cause them any
Histalkut.
However, this is not the case in the third Behina, as it comes by the
MAN de Yesod AK, which is the Behinot Vav and Nekuda, meaning
there is Behinat Hey Tata’a there. For that reason, its correction is not
permanent, but all the Tikkunim that come in this Behina are in the
form of ascending and descending, according to the actions of the
Tachtonim. Remember all the above as it is an introduction to
understand the Rav’s words before us.
30. AVI, called Hochma and Bina de Atzilut, take only the Bina of MA
between them, which is the Behinat Tagin de MA. ZA de Atzilut and
Nukva, which are the seven bottom Sefirot de Atzilut, take the
Behinat Otiot of the name MA, which are also the seven bottom
Sefirot of the name MA; ZA takes six and Nukva takes the seventh.

--- PAGE 677 ---
Thus, the division of the Eser Sefirot de MA in the Eser Sefirot de
Atzilut has been thoroughly clarified. You find, that they are not
aimed together.
31. Each side of the Nukva in Atzilut is made of the name BON, since
Atik takes the Taamim de BON to make its Nukva, and they are the
first five Sefirot in Keter de BON since every Sefira consists of ten.
Also, it takes GAR from Sefirat Hochma and the first four from
Bina de BON, and all this is for Nukva. Also, it takes seven Ketarim
for the above-mentioned Nukva, from the bottom seven de BON.
Arich takes the last five de Keter de BON for Nukva and Abba
takes the bottom seven de Hochma de BON. Ima takes the bottom
six de Bina de BON and ZON take all the bottom seven de BON,
except for the Ketarim in them, which Atik took.
Ohr Pnimi
31. Atik takes the Taamim de BON to make its Nukva, and they are the
first five Sefirot in Keter de BON.
It has already been explained in the previous item that the Eser Sefirot
de Nekudim that came out all at once there cannot be corrected in the
new MA there, but only one by one. Hence, when Atik, which is
Sefirat Keter, was corrected, it could not sort any Behinat Hochma.
For that reason the bottom half of Keter de Nekudim did not connect
with Behinat Atik de MA, since it is the Behinot NHY de Keter that
clothed the Mochin in AVI. Hence, they descended from the degree of
Keter to the degree of Hochma and are no longer fit to connect in
Rosh ha Aleph in Keter de Atzilut.
by saying that they are the first five Sefirot he means that they are half
the degree. Since the time of the ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the
Eynaim, all the degrees have been divided into two halves GE and
AHP. Only the Upper half remains in the degree, being GE, but the
bottom half went out of the degree and is considered lower than it.
In the Tree of Life (Gate No. 40, Study No. 8) the Rav writes: “This is
a great rule by which you will understand everything. The second

--- PAGE 678 ---
Partzuf is always the Upper half.”
This is the most important key in the wisdom that must always be kept
before one’s eyes, because most of the connections in the wisdom are
explained by it. In fact, the Upper part contains only two Sefirot,
which are the ones that came out when it was first created, called GE,
while the bottom part that went out of the degree contains three Sefirot
Bina, ZA and Nukva. However, since they are the two Upper Sefirot,
they are considered as half.
Also, it takes GAR from Sefirat Hochma and the first four from
Bina de BON.
The reason for it is that the place of the position of the Rosh de Atik de
MA is from the place of the Peh de Nekudim and upward through
Tabur de AK (Ohr Pnimi item 18), meaning the place where GAR de
Nekudim stand. Hence, everything that remains in GAR de Nekudim
after the breaking of vessels is taken by the Zachar de Atik that clothes
them there. It is indeed what came out there when they were first
created, which is the actual Behinat Katnut de GAR and Behinat Achor
be Achor.
However, since they are Behinat Galgalta ve Eynaim of the degree, he
therefore calls them GAR. This is because the whole matter of Gadlut
is only the return of Bina and ZON to the degree because by lowering
the Hey Tata’a to the Peh, Bina and ZON return to the degree, and
then acquire GAR de Gadlut.
Thus, the gist of what emerged in Katnut is GAR, meaning Galgalta
ve Eynaim, and the gist of the addition that comes during the Gadlut
are Bina and ZON. Hence, he names Katnut “Panim” or “GAR”, and
the Gadlut he names “Achoraim” or “ZAT”.
It turns out that since Atik Dechura clothes in the place of GAR de
Nekudim, it takes everything that remains there of these GAR into his
Behinat Nukva. However, from Bina, being Ima de Nekudim, he takes
the first four Sefirot, meaning Hesed of Bina too. This is because Ohr
Hesed is always in Bina when she is in Achoraim to Abba.

--- PAGE 679 ---
He only leaves there when Ima turns her Panim to Abba, as the Rav
wrote above (Part 5, Ohr Pnimi item 40). The seven Ketarim of ZAT
de BON that Atik Dechura took, it took only for its Behinat Guf.
Arich takes the last five de Keter de BON for Nukva and Abba
takes the bottom seven de Hochma de BON. Ima takes the bottom
six de Bina de BON and ZON take all the bottom seven de BON.
In order to understand these connections of MA and BON and the
necessity in the rations that the Rav ascribed to them, it is necessary to
write at some length. Thus a truly comprehensive concept of the Eser
Sefirot de Atzilut may be given, how they result from one another,
both the MA part in each of them, the BON part in each and every one
of them, and the necessitated connection in each and every Sefira.
Let us briefly repeat the words that have already been explained. It all
begins in the ascent of MAN to GAR de Nekudim in general, and from
there to Rosh de SAG, until the Hey Tata’a rose to the Metzach de
SAG. The Masach only gained the Aviut found in the Keter. Such a
fine Aviut generates only Komat Malchut, called NHY because of the
Tikun Kavim in her.
However, there is also Behinat Hitlabshut of the last Behina there,
which is Komat ZA de Hitlabshut. Hence, it is considered that HGT
are also clothed in Kelim de NHY. This is called “Gimel Go Gimel” or
“Ibur de Atik” (examine closely in Ohr Pnimi item 17).
This Ibur de Atik is actually Behinat Ibur that corrects the general
MAN that rose there since it was in the form of twelve months. Hence,
it immediately raised all the Kelim of the seven Melachim from BYA to
NHY de Atzilut by way of a general Ibur to the Kelim as the Rav says
above (item 3). However, a particular Ibur is still necessary, where
every Tachton is corrected in it by its Elyon (see item 20).
It is also called Zivug de Katnut, and after that there was a Zivug de
Gadlut. Know, that there are two Behinot here in the Zivug de Gadlut:
Panim be Achor and Panim be Panim, because the Tachton is only
born from the Zivug Panim be Panim de Elyon.

--- PAGE 680 ---
Hence there are three Zivugim to discern here: 1 – Zivug de Katnut,
which is Achor be Achor and Ibur; 2 – Zivug de Gadlut, which is the
lowering of Hey Tata’a from the place of the Metzach, which is
Behinat Panim be Achor, since there is no Behinat Panim be Panim
but through MAN; 3 – The Zivug on the MAN that rose to the Nukva,
which is Panim be Panim.
You also know that all these Komot that come out by Zivugim de
Katnut and Gadlut in Atzilut are called “the new MA”. Moreover, even
the Behinot Masach and Aviut of the Reshimot, which are only from
the Sefirot of the Eser Sefirot de Nekudim, being certainly BON, are
still considered Kelim de MA.
This is so because the Zivug from the Ohr Elyon came out on them,
and they are the measurements of the Komot in Atzilut. Hence, they
necessarily became the Kelim to MA, since the Masach in Malchut of
the Rosh expands to Eser Sefirot from her and within her, making
Kelim for the Eser Sefirot de Toch and Sof, called Guf.
However, only the Orot, meaning the Reshimot, the Nitzotzin and the
old Kelim that have already been used for Halbasha of Orot during the
Melachim in the GAR and the ZAT, are named BON, and remember
that.
Thus, the construction of the Katnut de Atik was made of the
Hitkalelut Masach in the Hey Tata’a, from her Atzmut, which is the
better part of the MAN and the Reshimot. It is known that from the
perspective of the Zivug, the more Av is better. However, because of
the weakness in the Masach, having only Behinat Keter of its Aviut, it
therefore raised the Hey Tata’a to Keter, to Metzach, which is Bina de
Keter, and from here stemmed the Komat Ibur de Atik.
The cause for the Zivug de Gadlut de Atik is the remains of MAN that
was left there in Rosh de SAG without any Tikun. This is because only
Komat NHY came out of the Behinat MA, connecting with the Upper
half of Keter de BON in Tikun Kavim Achor be Achor.
The rest of the MAN, being all four Achoraim de AVI and YESHSUT,
and the seven Orot de ZAT, remained without any He’arah. These

--- PAGE 681 ---
MAN induced the Zivug AB SAG where the He’arat AB lowered the
Hey Tata’a from Metzach to Peh. Since the Hey Tata’a descended in
her place, the Aviut de Behina Dalet reawakened in the Masach, and
the Ohr Elyon that mated with the Masach generated Komat Keter.
After the Aviut de Nekudim in the Masach was recognized, the
Masach returned to Peh de Nekudim and generated Eser Sefirot de
Rosh in Komat Keter from below upward, from Peh de Nekudim to
Tabur de AK. It is the same place of GAR de Nekudim (Ohr Pnimi
item 18).
It has already been explained that this Behinat Gadlut is Behinat
Panim be Achor because HB in these Eser Sefirot are not Panim be
Panim without MAN. Hence, Komat Keter de Rosh has not yet
expanded into Behinat Guf, since Bina de Rosh stands Achor be Achor
with Hochma. Thus, only Behinat Ruach Nefesh descended to Guf,
which is Komat ZA without He’arat Hochma.
Know, that here came the He’arat Ibur to half the lower Keter. This is
because you know that the two halves of Keter became a single degree
in Gadlut GAR de Nekudim. However, because of the breaking of the
Melachim, where the Hey Tata’a returned to the Eynaim, the two
halves of Keter were divided into two degrees once more, Elyon and
Tachton. GE remained in the degree and the AHP departed from there
to the lower Behina.
Thus, now by the new Zivug de AB SAG, the Hey Tata’a descended to
the place of Peh once more, and thus the two halves of Keter became
a single degree once more.
Yet, the lower half of Keter did not return to Rosh de Atik. This is
because of the double strength that was now made in Parsa (Ohr
Pnimi item 29). However, she received He’arah below in her place,
and this He’arah is the He’arat Ibur de AA in NHY de Atik, which is
from Rosh de Atik in the form of Panim be Achor.
This is so because the Upper half of Keter returned to Behinat Rosh
completely, by the force of the Komat Keter in the Zachar de Atik,

--- PAGE 682 ---
which gave her Behinat new AHP. Hence, the old AHP from Behinat
BON too, still received a great Tikun.
Yet, because Bina de Atik is still in the Achoraim to Abba, these AHP
can only receive He’arat Ibur, and understand that thoroughly. Thus,
we have explained the Rosh and Guf de Atik and Behinat Ibur de AA.
After AA, which is the bottom half of Keter, was completed in all the
Behinot de Ibur and was born in Behinat Ruach Nefesh, it rose to
MAN to Rosh de Atik, meaning to the Upper half of Keter, which is
Nukva de Atik. Thus, it caused Behinat Bina de Atik to return her
Panim to Hochma de Atik. Consequently, the Zivug was Panim be
Panim in HB de Rosh Atik.
Behinat GAR reached Guf de Atik too, and when the Aviut de AHP de
Keter was acknowledged from the Behinat Nekudim as they were
Behinat Mochin to HB de Nekudim, it descended from there to Behinat
Guf de Atik. It generated Eser Sefirot from below upward in Komat
Hochma, and from Behinat Panim be Achor as well, as Rosh de Atik
before the raising of the MAN.
The reason it did not come out in Komat Keter is because the more
important Behinat Aviut, which is Behina Dalet, was already sucked
by Partzuf Atik for itself. Hence, only Aviut de Behina Gimel remained
in the general MAN.
Thus, the Koma that came out on Aviut de Behina Gimel is called the
new MA, and the Kelim de AHP de Keter that already served as
Mochin in HB de Nekudim during the Melachim, are called BON, and
are Nukva de AA. However, only Ruach Nefesh expanded into their
Behinat Guf because Bina de Rosh de AA is in Achoraim to Hochma,
as mentioned in Atik.
Since AHP de Keter de BON were corrected in Behinot GAR to Nukva
de AA, He’arat Ibur came from her to ZAT de Hochma and Bina de
Nekudim, which are Behinat AHP de HB that Atik took. This is
because Atik took Behinat GE de HB de Nekudim, which are the
Behinot Katnut that remained after the breaking of the vessels and the

--- PAGE 683 ---
AHP, which are the Achoraim de HB that were cancelled, which are
considered ZAT.
Now they received He’arat Ibur from Nukva de AA because there is a
direct link for Nukva de AA, being AHP de Keter, with AHP de HB,
from the time of the Melachim. At that time they were clothed in each
other and AHP de Keter were their Mochin. Hence, now too it was
fitting that AHP de HB would rise to Rosh de AA and clothe the AHP
de Keter there. Thus, they would both be corrected in a single Tikun.
However, they cannot ascend because of the strength of the Parsa, and
for that they receive the He’arat Nukva de AA in their place below,
and this He’arah is considered He’arat Ibur. It is so because Bina de
Rosh de AA is still in Behinat Achoraim on Hochma, and so they
receive only the He’arat Ubar. Thus, we have explained the Gadlut de
Rosh and Guf de AA in Behinat Panim be Achor, and the Behinat Ibur
de Hochma and Bina de Atzilut, called AVI.
AVI de Atzilut, being ZAT de HB de BON, were completed in all the
Behinot de Ibur and were born in Behinat Ruach Nefesh because of
the He’arat Rosh de AA in Behinat Panim be Achor. Afterwards, AVI
rose to MAN to Nukva de Rosh de AA, which is AHP de Keter BON.
Thus, they caused Bina de Rosh de AA to return her Panim to Hochma
de Rosh AA Panim be Panim, and He’arat GAR reached Guf de AA
too. After the Aviut in ZAT de HB that rose to MAN was recognized,
they returned to their place in Guf de AA, and generated Komat Bina
from below upward from the Behinat Aviut.
There is also Komat Hochma from the Behinat Hitlabshut, and they
too were in Behinat Panim be Achor, as in Atik and AA. The reason
they did not come out in Komat Hochma is because the Aviut de
Behina Gimel had already sucked AA from the general MAN, and they
were only left with Aviut de Behina Bet. Komat Bina that came out on
Behina Bet is called the new MA, and the Behinat Kelim de ZAT de
Hochma and Bina is called BON.
After the Rosh de AVI was completed in Behinat GAR de Bina in
Behinat Panim be Achor, He’arat Ruach Nefesh came to Guf de AVI,

--- PAGE 684 ---
and He’arat Ibur came to ZAT de Nekudim. This is so because they are
related as Rosh and Guf of a single Partzuf from the time of the
Melachim. After the ZAT were completed in all the Behinot de Ibur,
they were born and came outside in Behinat Ruach Nefesh.
Thus we have explained Rosh and Guf de AVI in the Behinat Katnut
de ZON. MA de ZON is the He’arat Ibur that received from Rosh de
AVI, considered ZAT de MA, and BON de ZON is ZAT de Nekudim.
32. *We have clarified that the Dechura in Atik Yomin was made
entirely from Keter of the new MA, which are the Taamim de MA.
The Nukva in it is made of the First Hey de Keter de BON, which
are the Taamim de BON, GAR de Hochma de BON, the First four
of Bina de BON and the seven Ketarim de ZAT de BON.
Now we shall explain the matter of AA. The Eser Sefirot of the
Dechura in it was made entirely of the Hochma of the new MA,
which is Nekudot de MA, and the Nukva in it is made only of the
bottom five of Keter de BON, which expanded and became
complete Eser Sefirot in Nukva.
33. The Behinat Dechura de AA is explained, hence we shall now
explain the Behinat Nukva, since she is made of the sorts of the
Melachim de BON. We must clarify the appearance of this sort,
and the entire AA will be clarified along with it.
This is because the entire Atzilut was only sorted and corrected by
Iburim (pl. for Ibur), and every Partzuf was corrected and sorted
by the Partzuf Elyon above it. By mating with the Nukva, it sorted
the parts that this Tachton needs, they were there in the Nukva in
Behinat Ibur of twelve months, and it was corrected.
Ohr Pnimi
33. Every Partzuf was corrected and sorted by the Partzuf Elyon
above it.
It is written in the previous item that both the Ibur and the Zivug de
Gadlut of every Tachton was made in its Elyon. This is because the
two Zivugim de Atik were made in the Rosh de Atik, and the two

--- PAGE 685 ---
Zivugim de AVI were in Rosh de AA. Also, Zivug ZON was made in
Rosh de AVI, as is written and explained above.
By mating with the Nukva, it sorted the parts that this Tachton
needs.
It is written above, in the previous item, that all the sorts from the
Reshimot and the Kelim de BON were made by the Zivug Zachar and
Nukva de Partzuf Elyon. The Nukva de Elyon raised the sorts that
relate to it, which were on the same degree as her during the
Melachim, and the Zachar de Elyon corrected them with its
luminescence.
34. It turns out that the two Behinot in Atik Yomin, Dechura and
Nukva, mated together, and raised the five parts of the lower Keter
de BON, as MAN. They sorted the Orot from the Behinat Kelim
and were there in Behinat Ibur of twelve months, and AA was
corrected there.
35. We shall first explain the matter of Partzuf AA, and how the Eser
Sefirot in it are divided. Nine Sefirot are Behinat AA, since the
Nukva in it does not manifest, and the entire Behinat AA is called
Keter of the general Atzilut. This Keter is divided into nine Sefirot,
and this collective is called AA.
We have already explained the matter of the Hitlabshut of all the
Partzufim of Atzilut one within the other. It turns out that only the
Rosh of each Partzuf appears, and all these Roshim are then one
below the other, all depicted as a single Partzuf, containing the
entire Atzilut in general.
Since only the Levush Keter appeared from the entire AA, since
even the Hochma in it is concealed inside that Keter, hence the
entire AA is only called Keter. The two uncovered Roshim de AVI
come immediately after that and become Behinat HB of the
general Atzilut.
Reisha de ZA comes in their place through its Tabur and becomes
a Guf to the Atzilut in general. Then Nukva de ZA appears, called

--- PAGE 686 ---
Malchut of the general Atzilut. However, there is not a single
Partzuf that does not have ten general Sefirot, clothing within
another Partzuf as its separate Guf. So are the second in the third,
and so are all of them.
Ohr Pnimi
35. The entire Behinat AA is called Keter of the general Atzilut.
You must know, that there are three general discernments in all the
Partzufim of Atzilut: The first is the Behinot Shorashim to the Mochin;
the second is the Behinot Mochin themselves; the third is Behinat
ZON that receive the Mochin. This matter is necessitated here by the
Partzuf Elyon, which is SAG de AK, as it is known that all the forces
in the Elyon must necessarily be in its Tachton too.
You find there, in the beginning of the rooting of the attribute of Midat
ha Rachamim with Din, meaning the ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the
Eynaim de SAG, that it ejected the AHP from all the degrees
outwardly. Rosh SAG de AK itself acquired that association to the Eser
Sefirot of its Rosh, and the beginning of that Zivug of the Hey Tata’a
in the Eynaim came out in it.
Although its degree in itself, did not diminish at all because of this
ascent, it became the Shoresh to this Behinat association, where the
Behinat breaking of the degree appeared in it as Se’arot Dikna.
Hence, two Behinot Shorashim emerged opposite it in Atzilut, called
Atik and AA. The Shoresh for all the Mochin that come in the
association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din is Atik, similar to Rosh
SAG de AK, where the Zivug of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim was
made.
As the departure of the AHP could not manifest in the Rosh SAG
itself, so this matter too did not appear in Atik, but only in AA, which
is of similar value to Dikna de SAG de AK. Everything that is done by
the Zivug in the Rosh SAG appears only in its Dikna, and so it is in AA
and Atik too, where all the Zivugim made in Atik for Mochin de Atzilut
do not appear in Atik itself, only in AA (see Part 6, Ohr Pnimi item 2).

--- PAGE 687 ---
Thus we have explained the two Partzufim of Atik and AA, considered
roots of Mochin to Atzilut, like SAG de AK and its Dikna, which are
the roots of the association of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim.
After the Reshimot in SAG de AK were recognized as Behinat Guf,
they descended to their place in the Guf, the place of Tabur de AK,
where the Mochin of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim appeared in
Behinat Rosh. It is much the same here in Atzilut, where after the
Zivug was made in AA and Atik on the MAN that rose for the Mochin,
they descend to their place in the Guf, to Chazeh de AA, to manifest
the Mochin in its suitable place. They are called AVI de Atzilut,
meaning the Mochin.
Now you can understand the division of AVI de Atzilut to the four
Behinot of AVI. You must only keep in mind all that has been
explained regarding the ascent of the Masach that was purified from
the Guf de SAG into Behinat renewal of the Zivug in Rosh de SAG,
until it came to ZAT de Nekudim, as brought in the two previous parts.
Let us mention the things briefly: The Masach that rose from Guf de
SAG consisted of three Behinot Reshimot: Reshimot de Taamim de
SAG (see Part 6, Histaklut Pnimit item 24). MA Elyon de SAG came
out on their Zivug and after the Zivug its place was apparent from the
Peh de SAG through above Tabur de SAG. Since the Taamim never
descended below Tabur and did not mix with the inner NHY de AK at
all, it thus has nothing of Behinat Hey Tata’a and is considered as
Upper AVI, as the Rav says above (Part 6 item 6).
The second Behina de Reshimot, are the Reshimot of Nekudot de SAG.
These are the lower nine de SAG that expanded from Tabur down to
the Sium Raglin de AK, where they mixed with the Inner NHY de AK
and mingled with the Hey Tata’a.
The Eser Sefirot de Nekudim came out on their Zivug in the form of
Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim, which ejected the AHP from all the
degrees. After their Zivug in Rosh SAG, their place in Tabur de AK
became apparent, and Rosh ha Aleph came out from Tabur upward to
the Chazeh de SAG, which is the Peh de MA Elyon. GAR de Nekudim

--- PAGE 688 ---
have two Roshim, Keter and AVI, whose place is from the Sium
Tifferet to Tabur de AK.
Know, that these three Roshim that came out by the Zivug on the
Reshimot de Nekudot de SAG are all called YESHSUT, and they are
three Behinot YESHSUT. They are called that for the reason the Rav
has written above, that the Behinot SAG, mixed with the Inner MA and
BON de AK, are always called YESHSUT. The ones that are clean
from this mixture are called Upper AVI.
Since these came out on the Reshimot de Behinot Nekudot de SAG,
they are necessarily mixed with the Hey Tata’a of MA and BON de
AK. However, they contain three degrees: the first YESHSUT stands
from Tabur de AK upward. It is the best of them, because the Hey
Tata’a operates in it from below upward, and it is known that the Aviut
cannot operate anything above its origin of creation.
Hence, this YESHSUT is considered clean from Hey Tata’a; it is not
even regarded as Nekudim, but is completely similar to Behinat
Taamim of SAG, meaning the Upper AVI. Yet, it is certainly lower than
them for it still has the Orot that come from the Zivug of Hey Tata’a.
Nevertheless, it is considered the Shoresh of the Nekudim. However,
the above-mentioned MA Elyon, which is Behinat Upper AVI, is not
even considered the Shoresh for Nekudim, since it does not have
anything of these Orot, related to Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim.
The second degree is Rosh ha Bet de Nekudim, called Keter. Since it is
Behinot AHP of the first YESHSUT. Hence, the force of the Hey
Tata’a already controls it, and it is thus considered Behinat Nekudim.
However, in itself, it is divided into Galgalta ve Eynaim and AHP in
its Eser Sefirot, which are two Roshim.
For that reason, it is considered that in Keter too the Hey Tata’a
operates from below upward in its Behinot Nikvey Eynaim. For this
reason, the dominion of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim appears
primarily in the third Rosh, called AVI de Nekudim.

--- PAGE 689 ---
It is considered the Shoresh to the Mochin, which are AVI, where the
Hey Tata’a controls, but for itself, it is considered that the Hey Tata’a
is below it. The third YESHSUT, being AVI de Nekudim, are
considered the actual Behinat Nekudim, meaning Behinat Hey Tata’a
in the Eynaim, where it appears in all its control.
Now we have explained the two Behinot of Atzilut, which are the roots
of Mochin de Atzilut, called Atik and AA, relating to Rosh de SAG de
AK and its Dikna. The Zivug was made on the Masach there only in
the form of Hitkalelut for the Tachton, and after the Aviut in the
Masach had been recognized, it had to descend to its place.
This occurred in a similar manner in the Zivug in Atik and AA,
meaning only in the form of Hitkalelut, which is merely called
Shoresh for the Mochin. The second Behina was also clarified, being
AVI de Atzilut, which are the complete Mochin of Atzilut. However,
they are not Upper AVI, but only the fourth YESHSUT, relating to the
fourth YESHSUT de SAG de AK, being AVI de Nekudim.
Similarly, the four Behinot AVI emerge here too, and the fourth are the
Mochin de Atzilut, meaning they clothe in ZON de Atzilut, considered
the receivers of the Mochin. The entire matter of this association
revolves around them for the management of the world comes only
from ZON.
However, although we have clarified four Behinot in AVI, they are still
considered as only two primary Behinot. Upper AVI are one Behina,
and all three degrees of YESHSUT are considered as one Behina too.
ZON de Atzilut, which are the receivers of the Mochin, relate to ZAT
de Nekudim, born from the MAN de Yesod de AK, called Shuruk. They
are divided into two Behinot in Atzilut: the “Big ZON”, and the “Little
ZON”. This is before two Behinot came out in ZAT de Nekudim, which
are the four Melachim DHGT from AVI and the four Melachim
TNHYM from YESHSUT. In Atzilut they came out in the same manner:
the Big ZON related to DHGT, and the Little ZON related to TNHYM.
It is written, “all these Roshim are then one below the other, all
depicted as a single Partzuf, containing the entire Atzilut in

--- PAGE 690 ---
general.” It means that all the Partzufim of Atzilut primarily manifest
only in ZON. This is the Hidush Mochin that was made in Atzilut, in
the form of the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din, which
should uncover the matter of the conduct of reward and punishment in
this world.
This relates only to ZON, for only in them this conduct applies, that
when the Tachtonim are worthy, they raise MAN and the Mochin
appear in ZON, and when they are not worthy, the Mochin exit.
However, the actions of the Tachtonim do not blemish above ZON
whatsoever.
Thus, the Mochin is primarily for the reception of ZON. However, in
order to give them to ZON, they must come down through the
previous eight Partzufim, Atik and Nukva, AA and Nukva, for Behinot
Shorashim for the Mochin, and AVI and YESHSUT for the Mochin
itself. ZA cannot receive them but from the fourth YESHSUT, as we’ve
said, and thus they are all one Partzuf with one function.
36. Let us explain the order of these nine Sefirot divided in it, in AA.
AA is different from all the rest because all the other Partzufim,
whether Atik, or AVI or ZON, their Rosh is one Galgalta, which is
the Behinat Keter in the Partzuf.
Keter comes from the word Koteret (heading), as it is written, “the
wicked doth beset the righteous,” meaning surrounds him. The
Gulgolet (Heb. for Galgalta) is like one heading, surrounding the
entire Behinat Rosh.
There are two Mochin within that Galgalta, called the HB of that
Partzuf, Hochma on the right and Bina on the left. These two are
the majority of the Mochin. However, the third Moach below them
is made of those two in general, determining between them, in the
middle. It is called the Daat of the Partzuf. We shall explain what
is not included in the Eser Sefirot of the Partzuf, and all these three
Mochin HaVaYot will be built inside that Galgalta, called Keter.
After that the seven lower Sefirot HGT NHYM will expand in the
Guf one atop the other in the form of Kavim.

--- PAGE 691 ---
37. However, there is only one separated Mocha inside that Galgalta,
called Hochma de AA. Since this Hochma and that Mocha too,
contain Behinat three Mochin, as we will explain later, yet all three
are but Behinat Hochma itself.
Thus, it turns out that in that Reisha de AA there was only one
Galgalta, which is Keter de AA, and inside it, one Mocha which is
Hochma de AA. However, Bina de AA could not stand there in
Behinat Reisha.
38. We have learned that the reason for it is that Behinat Nukva de
Atik was made of the First five de Keter de BON, where there was
never any cancellation or even a blemish. However, the sorting of
the Melachim began in Nukva of AA as she was made of the last
five de Keter de BON, that were a little blemished.
From there on the flaws add in the rest of the Partzufim, as
mentioned there. Hence in Reisha de Atik, where there was no
blemish whatsoever, his Bina was able to receive the Ohr Elyon de
AK that extends within Reisha de Atik, when she is up there. For
that reason she too stood at Reisha de Atik, and then the Daat,
made of the connection of HB, stands there too.
Ohr Pnimi
38. Behinat Nukva de Atik was made of the First five de Keter de
BON… …the sorting of the Melachim began in Nukva of AA.
It has already been explained above, in the previous item, that Atik and
AA are related in the same manner as Rosh de SAG and its Dikna. For
that reason, Atik did not sort from the BON for its Nukva, but only
those Behinot that were not controlled by any flaw due to the
breaking. This is because the matter of the Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim
that we discern in the descent of the degrees of SAG de AK is of
similar value to the Behinat Reshimot de BON. Its degrees descend
according to the blemish they were blemished by the breaking of the
vessels.

--- PAGE 692 ---
That mixture is not at all apparent in Rosh SAG, though there is
Hitkalelut Zivug de Hey Tata’a in the Eynaim in it. Similarly, Atik,
which relates to it, cannot take any Behina from the somewhat
blemished BON by the breaking of the vessels for its construction.
Hence, it did not take from BON, but from its Behinat Katnut,
meaning everything that emerged in it from its very creation, meaning
only the Upper half of Keter BON, meaning only its Behinat Galgalta
ve Eynaim. These did not receive anything within them, even from the
He’arat NHY de AK that emerged through the Tabur in the form of
Holam above the Otiot.
For that reason it has nothing of the Behinot ZAT de Nekudim, since
the He’arat Holam through the Tabur is the Shoresh to the ZAT de
Nekudim. This is because this Ohr descended from Zivug de AB SAG
made on MAN de NHY de AK that rose to them. Also, NHY de AK are
considered the Shoresh of ZON de Nekudim since AVI generated ZAT
de Nekudim on their MAN.
This He’arah that came out through the Tabur to Keter de Nekudim
lowered the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim de Keter to Peh de Nekudim
and returned AVI to Behinat Rosh. In that state Keter itself gained its
GAR too, since it now has complete Eser Sefirot as it acquired its AHP
from the return of AVI to its Rosh.
However, before AVI returned to the Rosh, Keter had only Galgalta ve
Eynaim, which are Behinot Orot de Ruach Nefesh. This is because
Orot de HGT are clothed in Galgalta and Orot de NHY are clothed in
the Eynaim.
Hence, although it is not completed by the He’arat Tabur de AK but
only in the three lower Kelim Bina and ZON, they still returned KHB
de Orot to it from the aspect of the Orot. This Bina and these ZON that
Keter gained by the He’arat NHY de AK are considered Sigim with
respect to Atik because the cancellation during the Melachim
happened in them, and they fell back to Behinat VAK. This is called
the annulment of NHY de Keter.

--- PAGE 693 ---
For that reason Atik gave these Bina and ZON de Keter to AA, since it
relates to the Behinat Dikna de SAG, the place of the manifestation of
the Katnut, which is at Rosh de SAG. Hence, AA received Behinot
Bina, and ZON de Keter of the blemished BON into its Behinat Nukva.
It is written, “Behinat Nukva de Atik was made of the First five de
Keter de BON, where there was never any cancellation or even a
blemish.” As it is written, that it was made from the Behinat Katnut
de Keter that came out in it from its very creation. It remained
complete, and not a thing of it was cancelled even a bit.
However, the sorting of the Melachim began in Nukva of AA since she
was made of the last five of Keter de BON which were a little flawed.
This means, as we have explained, that AA was made of Bina and
ZON de Keter, which Keter gained the new Ohr of NHY de AK that
illuminated on it through the Tabur. This Ohr was cancelled once
more and Bina and ZON de Keter descended from Rosh to VAK once
more, hence, they are flawed.
From there on the flaws add in the rest of the Partzufim.
This is because Bina and ZON that Hochma gained by Ohr de NHY de
AK that came out through the Tabur was blemished more than Bina
and ZON de Keter. This is because Hochma participated in the MAN
de Shuruk, which are the Behinat Hey Tata’a itself.
Bina and ZON de Bina de BON were blemished even more than
Hochma. This is because Bina de Nekudim did not extend her Bina
and ZON by He’arat Holam, as Abba, but only through the MAN de
Shuruk that she received from Yesod de AK, which is the Behinat
Atzmut de Hey Tata’a, from which ZON were born. The Behinot seven
Orot of ZAT are blemished most since they broke in Panim and Achor
and descended to BYA.
39. The sorting from the Melachim that had some flaw n them was in
Reisha de AA. Hence, his Bina is more Dinim than Hochma, as
Dinim always awaken from her, since she is Nukva. Thus, she
could not receive the Ohr Atik that clothes inside Reisha de AA in a
high place in Reisha.

--- PAGE 694 ---
This is because there is great Ohr there, close to Atik, and thus she
came down in the Behinat Garon de AA. Since she was further
there, she had the ability of receiving the Ohr of Atik.
Ohr Pnimi
39. In Reisha de AA etc. his Bina etc. she came down in the Behinat
Garon.
It means that these AHP that Nukva de AA were made of, consist of
Eser Sefirot GE and AHP, also considered as Panim and Achoraim.
This is because there are two Behinot in them: One – they joined to
complement AHP de Keter. This is considered Behinat Galgalta ve
Eynaim in these AHP; Two – they expanded to being Mochin to AVI
de Nekudim.
This is considered as Behinat AHP in these AHP. Hence, when Nukva
de Atik sorted these AHP for the Nukva de AA she only sorted Behinat
GE, which are Behinot Keter and Hochma de AHP that belong to
Behinat Keter de Nekudim, which is Nukva de Atik.
However, Bina and ZON of AHP, which are NHY de Keter that turned
into Mochin in Hochma and Bina de Nekudim are considered as the
degrees of AVI de Nekudim, and not as the degree of Keter. Hence,
Bina departed from the Rosh de AA.
There is yet another important reason that Bina could not stand at
Rosh de AA. The rule is that everything that is not flawed by the
breaking received its correction from the new MA, completely and
permanently, and never leaves there. However, the Mochin do not
remain permanently in the flawed Kelim by the breaking, but are
rather in a state of “coming and going”.
Hence, Behinat AHP de AHP, namely their Bina and ZON, are
considered flawed with regard to Rosh de AA that received Komat
Hochma from Atik. Hence she cannot receive this great Ohr
permanently in Rosh de AA, and thus descended outside the Rosh.
It is written, “thus she came down in the Behinat Garon de AA.
Since she was further there, she had the ability of receiving the

--- PAGE 695 ---
Ohr of Atik.” This is so because with her descent to the Garon she
receives her Mochin temporarily; sometimes she connects with the
Rosh to a single Partzuf and has Mochin de GAR from AA, and
sometimes she is not connected and then has no Mochin. In this
manner she is worthy of receiving.
There is a third reason, as the Rav wrote, “Bina is more Dinim than
Hochma, as Dinim always awaken from her.” Interpretation: you
already know that the flaws add and accumulate in the Partzufim (item
18 here and Ohr Pnimi item 29). This is so because there are three
Behinot in them: First, what came out in the beginning of Atzilut,
which were not flawed at all, which Atik took. Second, what came out
in Nekudim by the He’arat Holam through Tabur de AK from which
GAR came Panim be Achor. The third is the He’arat Shuruk from
Yesod de AK where GAR came from in Behinat Panim be Panim.
These three Behinot apply only in GAR de Nekudim. After that there is
Behinot ZAT de Nekudim that broke Panim and Achor. The best from
Behinat Achoraim de AVI is what comes from the He’arat Holam by
the He’arat Tabur.
This He’arah of Holam did not reach the AHP from the Behinat Bina
even in AHP de Keter. It is so because Bina did not return her Panim
to Abba to receive He’arat Hochma from him and complete her AHP
before the MAN de Shuruk that she received from Yesod de AK
reached her. Thus, all the Behinot AHP de Bina are from He’arat Hey
Tata’a, contained in Shuruk. This is the meaning of the Dinim
awakening from Bina.
40. However, the Bina of the rest of the Partzufim below AA had the
ability to stand at the Rosh of the Partzuf. The reason is that Ohr
Atik is a greater Ohr than all of Atzilut, since Ohr Ein Sof clothes
inside it. Since Atik had already been clothed inside AA, the Ohr
was greatly lessened. When AVI return a second time, to clothe AA
too, Ohr Atik is found to be very distant from them.
Thus, their Bina has the ability to receive the Ohr Atik, after she is
distant, while sitting at the Rosh of the Partzuf, and all the more so

--- PAGE 696 ---
in ZON, which drew even farther.
41. *After we have clarified the matter of AA, we shall now clarify the
order of its ten Sefirot, and how they clothe Atik Yomin. We have
already explained above that this is the reason it is called Atik
Yomin, as its seven days clothe AA separately. This is their order:
Keter de AA clothes Hesed de Atik, and Hochma to Gevura, and
Bina to Tifferet.
42. The reason is that since they are the Upper three of AA, which are
Behinat Reisha and require more Ohr than in the Guf, hence a
complete Sefira of Atik is clothed in each of them. However, the
lower seven of Guf de AA do not require as much Ohr as the Rosh,
hence the last three de Atik will suffice to shine in them.
This is their order: Atzmut NHY de Atik in HGT de AA, as
mentioned, and that too is because HGT de AA later became
Mochin in the First Three de Abba and Ima. Hence, their He’arah
is primarily in HGT de AA to shine for Mochei (pl. for Mochin)
AVI. Afterwards Ohr came out alone from Yesod de Atik and
expanded in NHY de AA.
Ohr Pnimi
42. They are the Upper three of AA, which are Behinat Reisha and
require more Ohr than in the Guf.
Because HGT de AA became Mochin to AVI. These words are
profound indeed, and require length.
First, we must know that the matter of Hitlabshut NHY de Elyon in the
Behinot Mochin in the Tachton, and the matter of the Halbasha of the
Tachton to Guf de Elyon are separate matters. Note, that NHY de Atik
clothe Mochin in Rosh de AA, and yet, Rosh de AA clothes HGT de
Atik, not NHY de Atik.
Also, in AVI, NHY de AA clothe in the Mochin in Rosh de AVI, and
yet, the Roshim de AVI clothe only HGT de AA and not NHY de AA at
all. The reason is simple: These NHY de Elyon that clothe the Mochin
in the Tachton are Behinat NHY de Eser Sefirot de Rosh de Elyon and

--- PAGE 697 ---
have no dealings with the Halbasha of the Tachton to the Guf de
Elyon.
Know, that there are three Behinot NHY de Elyon: the first – NHY de
Eser Sefirot de Rosh of the Elyon from its very creation. The second –
the NHY that appear in it by the ascent of MAN of the Tachton. The
third – the new NHY that appeared in it by the ascent of the MAN of
the progeny of the Tachton.
We shall understand the matters according to the order of the creation
of the three Partzufim Atik, AA, and AVI. You know, that by Zivug AB
SAG that the Hey Tata’a generated from the Metzach and lowered to
her place in the Peh, Eser Sefirot came out on Komat Keter.
This was done first by Hitkalelut of the MAN of Nekudim in Rosh de
SAG, and afterwards, when the Aviut of the Reshimot was
acknowledged, they descended to their place, to Peh de Nekudim.
There they once more generated Eser Sefirot de Rosh from Peh de
Nekudim to Tabur de AK on Komat Keter, called Rosh de Atik (Ohr
Pnimi item 20).
This sufficed for Behinat Rosh de Atik and to its Behinat Guf because
Bina of this Rosh stands as she always does in Behinat Achoraim to
Abba. Hence, she only imparts the Guf with Ruach Nefesh, and the
Guf lacks GAR. Thus we have explained the creation of Rosh and Guf
de Atik, and now we shall explain Partzuf AA.
Partzuf AA is sorted by Nukva de Atik. Since she is the Upper half de
Keter de Nekudim, meaning the Behinot ve Eynaim de Keter that came
out when it was first created, through her connection with MA, she
now acquired GAR de Keter. She extends her AHP from the time of
the Nekudim once more, meaning the NHY de Keter that were then
cancelled by the concealment of GAR de Keter.
Now that she acquires the GAR by the new MA once more, she returns
and draws them to her, to complete her old Eser Sefirot. Since these
AHP are also from Behinot NHY de AK, hence, they became MAN
there, and caused Bina de Atik to return to being Panim be Panim with
Hochma.

--- PAGE 698 ---
It is known that the coming of ZON in the place of Bina always
awakens Bina to return her Panim to Abba. This is in order to draw
He’arat Hochma for ZON, who is connected to them to provide them
with He’arat Hochma from the perspective of Bina and ZON de Eser
Sefirot de Ohr Yashar. It is known that only Behina Gimel de Aviut
remained in them. This is because Behina Dalet, which was in the
general MAN, was taken by Atik. Hence, only Komat Hochma
emerged on them.
It turns out that Nukva de Atik acquired her Behinat AHP from the
time of the Nekudim by that new Zivug that emerged in her. It means
that she was once more completed with Eser complete Sefirot GE and
AHP, though not in the Koma she has from MA, which is Komat
Keter, but only in Komat Hochma.
Now it is considered to have two Behinot of NHY in Keter de Nukva.
The first is NHY de Keter that she has from Kelim de MA, and the
second, NHY de Komat Hochma that she now acquired by the new
MAN de AHP.
Two Komot extend below from this Zivug: the first is to the Guf de
Atik itself, because after Bina de Rosh returned Panim be Panim, its
He’arah reaches the Guf too. Now the Guf gains Behinot GAR, but
only GAR de Komat Hochma, and not Komat Keter, as it is in the
Rosh.
This is so because the Zivug Panim be Panim, made in the Rosh, was
only on the new Behinot MAN, which do not have more than Aviut de
Behina Gimel. The second Koma extends to Behinat Rosh de AA, to
the place of Chazeh de Atik, which clothes it from the Chazeh to the
Peh.
Now you can understand the matter of Hitlabshut NHY de Elyon to
Mochin in the Tachton. Indeed, they are a part of the Tachton and are
not fitting to remain in the Elyon. This is so because they are the same
AHP that completed Nukva de Atik during the Zivug of MAN de AA.
Even though they joined her during the Zivug, they are still unworthy
of remaining in her, since they are from Behinat Komat Hochma. After

--- PAGE 699 ---
their own Aviut had been recognized, their flaw from the time of
Nekudim becomes known too, that they do not merit being in the place
of Atik. Hence, they descend to the place of Guf de Atik along with
Komat Rosh de AA.
Here you should know what the Rav writes below, that when they are
born, all the Partzufim fall to Beria and suck there from the two
bottom thirds de Netzah and Hod de Atik there. The reason is that this
Masach, which contains all the Reshimot in the Achoraim de NHY de
Keter and the four Achoraim de AVI and ZAT, this Masach is from
Behinat Guf de Nekudim that rose to Behinat Rosh de SAG after its
Hizdakchut.
From there it descended from degree to degree until it generated all
the Partzufim de ABYA. Hence, since the Guf de Nekudim illuminated
in the entire BYA, thus, before the Aviut was recognized in its Guf,
meaning while it was still contained in Aviut de Rosh, it could be in
Behinat Atzilut.
However, after its Aviut de Guf is recognized, it is time for the Koma
to depart from the Hitkalelut in the Rosh and descend to her own
place, to the place it was prior to its Hizdakchut. This is called the
birth of the Partzuf.
Then the Behinot Guf de Nekudim become apparent, which were in the
Masach prior to its Hizdakchut, when it was in Behinot BYA. Hence,
each and every Koma that came out on this Masach was compelled to
come to Beria at the moment of its birth, meaning when its Aviut is
recognized.
However, by Yenika from the two bottom thirds of Netzah and Hod de
Atik, which are in Beria, they acquire the Behinat Atzilut in them once
more, until they rise and clothe the Guf de Elyon. The same also
happened to AA, and after the Aviut de Guf in the Masach that was in
it from Behinot BYA too was recognized, it was compelled to leave
Behinat Rosh de Atik and come to the place of Beria, under Parsa de
Atzilut. This is called the birth of the Partzuf.

--- PAGE 700 ---
It turns out that the Behinot NHY de Mochin that it received from the
Elyon remain in the Guf de Atik. After AA sucked from the two bottom
thirds of Atik, returned to Atzilut and clothed HGT NHY de Atik, it then
returned and received the NHY de Rosh de Elyon, which clothed in it
as Mochin.
Thus we see that the beginning of the reception of AA to NHY de Atik
was while it was still contained in the Zivug de Rosh de Atik.
However, since during its birth, it was compelled to come down to
Beria, it must therefore return and receive them from HGT de Atik
once again.
It was similar in the creation of AVI by Nukva de AA. This is because
AVI were made of Behinat ZAT de HB de BON, meaning AHP that
were cancelled from AVI after they’ve lost their GAR. During the
Nekudim, ZAT of these AVI were on the same degree as NHY de Keter
de Nekudim, and also clothed them in Behinot Mochin.
Hence, after Nukva de AA, which is Behinat NHY de Keter Nekudim
received Behinot GAR by the Zivug de Atik, she extended Behinat
AHP de AVI to Behinat MAN too. AA and Nukva mated on these MAN
Panim be Panim and generated Eser Sefirot in Komat Bina, since only
Aviut de Behina Bet remained in the Reshimot, as AA took Behina
Gimel for himself.
Two Komot came out by this Zivug, as with Atik, one for Guf de AA
itself, which was only in Behinat Nefesh Ruach before, and could not
receive from its Rosh, since Bina stands in Achoraim to Abba. Now,
through the MAN from AVI that returned Panim be Panim, Guf de AA
too received the GAR. However, they are GAR de Behina Bet, not
from Behina Gimel, as it has in the Rosh, and a second Koma came
out to Rosh de AVI, whose MAN are theirs.
Here too it is considered that NHY de AA clothed in Rosh de AVI,
meaning Behinot AHP that Nukva de AA took from the MAN to
complete the Eser Sefirot during the Zivug as with Atik for AA. When
AVI were born, meaning when their Masach was recognized, they
descended to Beria too for the same reason mentioned in AA. The

--- PAGE 701 ---
Behinot NHY and the Mochin remained in Guf de AA until they
returned to Atzilut through the Yenika and clothed HGT de AA, and
then Behinot NHY returned and received their Mochin.
You should know that AA cannot mate on the MAN de AVI but only
when it connects and becomes one Partzuf with Atik. This is because
Nukva de AA is only half of the bottom Keter de Nekudim, which is
only Behinat NHY. In order to sort out the MAN de AVI and mate on
them, Keter must be as complete as it was during the Nekudim, when
it clothed for Mochin in AVI de Nekudim.
Moreover, the Zivug is primarily named after the Nukva de Atik
because the bottom of Keter is cancelled and incorporates in one
complete degree with the Elyon when connecting with its Upper half.
The Tachton, on the other hand, does not even bear a name, as the Rav
says (Part 6 item 6).
Accordingly, you will find that Atik gives two kinds of Mochin for AA:
the first is for Rosh de AA, which are Eser Sefirot on Komat Hochma,
clothed in NHY de Atik that appeared because of this Zivug in Rosh de
Atik. These NHY descend to AA together with the Mochin, since they
are unworthy of Atik.
Atik gives the second Mochin for the Guf de AA. This is because the
Guf de AA cannot receive Behinat GAR from its own Rosh, as they are
Behinat Panim be Achor. Only through raising the MAN de AVI do
Atik and Arich return to become one Partzuf. HB de Rosh also return
Panim be Panim and then descend are impart GAR to Guf de AA.
Since that Zivug is also named after Atik, even the Mochin de Guf are
imparted from the Zivug Atik, though from a low Koma, since it is
from MAN de AVI, which is but Behina Bet. Yet, you must understand
that the Mochin de Behina Bet in Guf de AA is also clothed in NHY de
Atik, meaning the AHP by which Nukva de Atik was completed during
the Zivug of this Koma de Behina Bet.
Now we have explained the two Zivugim de Atik for AA, and the two
Behinot NHY de Atik that clothe AA. NHY de Atik from Komat

--- PAGE 702 ---
Hochma clothe Rosh de AA, and NHY de Atik from Komat Bina clothe
the Guf de AA.
Now you can also see that after the Yenika of AVI from the two bottom
thirds de Netzah and Hod de Atik, while still in Beria, they thus
acquire the strength to rise to Atzilut and clothe HGT de AA. Then they
receive the NHY with their Mochin from the Behinat NHY de Atik,
clothed in HGT de AA.
There are three Behinot NHY de Eser Sefirot de Rosh de Atik that you
find here: 1 – NHY de Eser Sefirot de Rosh Atik, from its very
creation, from Komat Keter. 2 – NHY de Eser Sefirot de Rosh Atik that
emerged in it out of the Hitkalelut of the MAN de AA. These are NHY
de Komat Hochma, clothing the Mochin de Rosh de AA. 3 – NHY de
Eser Sefirot de Rosh Atik that emerged in it out of the Hitkalelut of
MAN de AVI. These are NHY de Komat Bina, clothing Guf de AA in its
HGT. AVI from the Levushim of the HGT de AA receive Mochin de
GAR by these NHY de Atik, clothed in HGT de AA.
It is written, “since they are the Upper three of AA, which are
Behinat Reisha and require more Ohr than in the Guf, hence a
complete Sefira of Atik.” In other words, HGT NHY that give the
Mochin de Rosh in Komat Hochma by its return to Atzilut and clothing
the HGT de Atik. Hence, it needs all three Sefirot de Atik, made into
the KHB in it, while its primary He’arah de AA comes from them.
“However, the lower seven of Guf de AA do not require as much
Ohr as the Rosh, hence the last three de Atik will suffice to shine in
them.” This means, as we have said, that NHY de Atik that shine in
Guf de AA are low He’arah from Komat Hochma de AA, and are only
from Komat Bina. They too stand there primarily to shine He’arat
GAR in AVI.
It is written, “that too is because HGT de AA later became Mochin
in the First Three de Abba and Ima. Hence, their He’arah is
primarily in HGT de AA to shine for Mochei (pl. for Mochin) AVI.”
It means that NHY de Atik, which clothe Guf de AA, give the Mochin
de GAR to AVI.

--- PAGE 703 ---
43. Now you know the reason to what has become known and
clarified, that all the Behinot NHY of any Partzuf from the
Partzufim, always come as supplements, not as the core. This is
why they are considered outside the Guf.
The reason is that in the Rosh of the Partzufim of Atzilut, which is
AA, where all the other Partzufim of Atzilut clothe and hold, its
NHY have nothing to rely on in it, in Atik Yomin. This is because
only the ZAT de Atik clothed the First seven de AA, and there is
only He’arah in NHY de AA, which stems from Yesod de Atik and
expands in them. For that reason this whole issue continues in
every NHY of all the other Partzufim.
Ohr Pnimi
43. Its NHY have nothing to rely on in it, in Atik Yomin. This is
because only the ZAT de Atik clothed the First seven de AA.
This means the true NHY de Rosh Atik, from its creation, which are at
Komat Keter. These NHY do not clothe AA at all, but only from its
Behinat Guf, which are from Komat Hochma, found in HGT de Atik,
which are Behinat ZAT de Atik.
Since it is so, AA itself, being Behinat Keter de Nekudim, lacks NHY
de Kelim and GAR de Orot. This is so because its GAR are from a
lower degree, and since AA is considered the general Keter de Atzilut,
and it lacks its GAR, hence, all the degrees descending after it are
found to be lacking NHY de Kelim and GAR de Orot. This is so
because the GAR of each of them is GAR of its inferior degree, and its
own GAR are missing from it, as we have explained regarding AA.
It is written, “all the Behinot NHY of any Partzuf from the
Partzufim, always come as supplements, not as the core.” This is
because the Partzuf does not acquire its own NHY unless by joining
and Hitkalelut with the Elyon to a single Partzuf, as we have
explained regarding AA becoming one Partzuf with Atik by the MAN
de AVI that it received. This He’arah is considered an addition, not as
the core of the Partzuf, but rising and falling, as we will write below.

--- PAGE 704 ---
44. However, on another occasion, my teacher explained them to me
more clearly, in the following manner: It is known, that every
Shok consists of three Prakin, as mentioned in the Zohar
(VaYechi). However, Yesod consists of but two Prakin, being the
Yesod and the Atara in it.
Thus, the two Upper Prakin de NH de Atik clothed the HG de AA,
Netzah on the right, and Hod in Gevura on the left Kav; Yesod in
Tifferet de AA and the two middle Prakin de NH de Atik in NH de
AA. Also, Ateret Yesod de Atik in Yesod de AA, and Malchut de Atik
in Malchut de AA, because a complete Partzuf of Nukva must be
made of it.
For that reason she took one complete measure. You find, that the
two bottom Prakin de NH de Atik remained below the entire NH de
AA, and remained uncovered.
Ohr Pnimi
44. Every Shok consists of three Point in the heart... …You find, that
the two bottom Prakin de NH de Atik remained.
The difference between Hitlabshut NHY de Elyon to Mochin in the
Tachton has already been explained. Hitlabshut NHY de Elyon to
Mochin in the Tachton, or in the progeny of the Tachton, means NHY
de Eser Sefirot de Rosh. These are the same NHY that completed the
Rosh de Elyon in Eser Sefirot during their Hitkalelut in the Zivug de
Rosh de Elyon. However, the Halbasha of the Tachton to the Elyon,
meaning to HGT NHY de Guf Elyon, is because the Tachton is always
on the same degree with the Guf de Elyon.
Now you can see that the rumors brought here in the name of the Rav
do not contradict each other whatsoever. He says above that NHY de
Atik only clothe in HGT de AA and not at all in NHY, but only
He’arah emerges from Yesod de Atik and expands in NHY. This refers
to the Behinat Hitlabshut NHY de Atik to Mochin in HGT de AA for
the Rosh de AVI that clothe those HGT.

--- PAGE 705 ---
He also says here that NHY de Atik clothe also NHY de AA, as in HGT
de AA, where the Upper thirds clothe in HGT de AA and the middle
thirds clothe in NHY de AA. This relates to the Behinat Halbasha of
the Tachton to the Elyon, which certainly clothes up to the Sium of the
Elyon, meaning through the end of Atzilut, since all the Partzufim of
Atzilut end equally. It turns out that even the NHY de Tachton
necessarily clothe some of the NHY de Elyon.
However, we have said above that it speaks of Behinat Hitlabshut
NHY de Elyon as Mochin. It is certain that NHY de Atik are clothed
only in HGT, for the He’arat Mochin de AVI, which they clothe there.
Yet, NHY de Atik are not at all related to NHY de AA, where ZON
clothe, to clothe in them for He’arat Mochin. This is because the
Mochin de ZON come only by connecting AA and AVI, and have only
He’arah from Behinat Atik.
This is the precision that the Rav makes above, “Atzmut NHY de Atik
in HGT de AA, as mentioned, and that too is because HGT de AA
later became Mochin in the First Three de Abba and Ima. Hence,
their He’arah is primarily in HGT de AA to shine for Mochei (pl.
for Mochin) AVI. Afterwards Ohr came out alone from Yesod de
Atik and expanded in NHY de AA.”
As we have explained in the previous item, this means that only AVI
rise to MAN in Rosh de Atik along with AA, and thus take the Atzmut
de NHY de Atik with them, uncovered by their Hitkalelut in that Zivug.
The Zivug de ZON, however, is not done there, but only in AA along
with AVI, as we shall explain below.
45. It is known that the Raglaim of AA end at the Sof of Olam Atzilut.
Thus, these two bottom Prakin de NH de Atik in Olam Beria are
uncovered, without Levush. They joined together and clothed in
Malchut de AA, and there became two Dadim to her, on either side
of her.
This is the meaning of Dadei Behema, which are below the
Raglaim, from which the Melachim that descended in Beria sucked
before their place was corrected in AA, AVI, and ZON. Even after

--- PAGE 706 ---
they were born, each and every Partzuf first descended there and
sucked from them, and then rose to their place.
Ohr Pnimi
45. Thus, these three bottom Prakin de NH de Atik in Olam Beria.
These words are seemingly perplexing. What caused the matter of the
division of NHY de Atik into three thirds in this manner, until Olam
Atzilut was not enough for them, and the two bottom thirds had to
depart to Olam Beria? Also, why were all three thirds not clothed in
HGT NHY de AA, and how are the Upper thirds of HGT de AA and the
middle thirds of NHY de AA related?
These things are indeed deeper than the sea, and we shall explain them
here. Know, that the origin of the division of the thirds in this manner
extends from NHY de AK. It has been explained above (Part 6,
Histaklut Pnimit items 14, 26) that because of Tzimtzum Bet de AK,
where the two Heyin, the First and the second, joined together, the
point of Tzimtzum in the place of Olam ha Zeh in Behinat Malchut de
Eser Sefirot de NHY de AK, rose to the place of Sefirat Bina de Eser
Sefirot de NHY de AK.
Thus, the three Sefirot Bina and ZON de Eser Sefirot de NHY de AK
remained below the Sium of the Kav de Ein Sof, meaning below the
point of Tzimtzum. They became a place for the three Olamot: Beria,
Yetzira, Assiya, in the above-mentioned two places.
Even afterwards, when the Ohr that fissured the Parsa descended and
clothed NHY de AK, the new Gevul did not change because of that. It
is so, although ZAT de Nekudim that departed from He’arat NHY de
AK along with AVI de Nekudim, crossed the new Gevul and wanted to
expand their dominion below the Gevul, meaning in the three Olamot
BYA. Hence, they broke and remained in BYA, meaning the place of
their dominion.
NHY de AK, whose ZON departed and became BYA, and their Keter
and Hochma remained in Atzilut. These Bina and ZON are merely

--- PAGE 707 ---
regarded as the two bottom thirds of these Eser Sefirot de NHY, as this
is how the AHP that came out of all the degrees is considered.
You will find that the Rav referred to the AHP de Keter that came out
of Keter as Five Bottom Sefirot de Keter BON, which are only
TNHYM. Also, the principal part of Sefirat Tifferet, meaning its Upper
third, is considered the Upper half de Keter, and only the two bottom
thirds of Tifferet belong to the AHP.
Thus, six Sefirot of the degree, KHB HGT, belong to the Upper half de
Keter, which is only Galgalta ve Eynaim, and four Sefirot of the
degree, NHYM, belong to the bottom half of the degree. The reason for
it has already been explained in Part 7, and there is nothing more to
add here.
Hence, it is considered that the six Upper Sefirot of the Eser Sefirot de
NHY de AK remained in Atzilut, and only four Sefirot, NHYM of these
Eser Sefirot came out and were made into BYA, meaning from their
Chazeh downward. Similarly, Eser Sefirot de NHY de AK are divided
into three thirds, KHB, HGT, NHYM. The two Upper thirds, KHB
HGT, remained in Atzilut, and only the bottom thirds, which are
NHYM, became BYA.
It is known that there is no absence in the spiritual, and the matter of
the second Tzimtzum that was made in NHY de AK are regarded as
merely additions to them. Thus, no change was made in the first NHY
de AK, who now end at the Nekuda de Olam ha Zeh too, as it is
written, “And His feet shall stand upon the mount of Olives.”
It is known that Partzuf Atik de Atzilut is between AK and the
Partzufim of Atzilut, where Atzmut Malchut de AK operates, which is
Behinat Hey Tata’a before the Tzimtzum, meaning Malchut concealed
in RADLA. Her Atzmut does not manifest in all the Partzufim of
Atzilut at all, since she is Midat ha Din, without the association of
Midat ha Rachamim, which is the First Hey. Hence, it too ends at the
Nekudat Olam ha Zeh, as the first NHY de AK prior to Tzimtzum Bet,
which is the association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din.

--- PAGE 708 ---
It turns out that NHY de Atik are divided into three thirds, as we have
explained above regarding the Eser Sefirot de NHY de AK. The two
Upper thirds de NHY, KHB HGT, stand in Atzilut and end equally with
all the Partzufim of Atzilut, meaning on the new Gevul de Tzimtzum
Bet. The bottom thirds, which are NHYM, are already below the Sium
of Atzilut, expanding in BYA down to the Nekuda de Olam ha Zeh, as
the first NHY de AK.
These two Upper thirds of NHY, which are Behinot KHB HGT that
remained in Atzilut, are so only with regard to the Kelim. However,
with regard to the Ohr in them, they are but HGT NHY, as it is known
that HGT NHY de Orot clothe KHB HGT de Kelim.
It is written, “the two Upper Prakin de NH de Atik clothed the HG
de AA, Netzah on the right, and Hod in Gevura on the left Kav;
Yesod in Tifferet de AA.” It means that the Upper thirds of NHY de
Atik are KHB de Kelim and HGT de Orot, hence their place is also in
HGT de AA.
“…and the two middle Prakin de NH de Atik in NH de AA. Also,
Ateret Yesod de Atik in Yesod de AA, and Malchut de Atik in
Malchut de AA.” This means that the middle Prakin de NHY de Atik
are HGT de Kelim and NHY de Orot, hence they clothe NHYM de AA.
When he says that Malchut de Atik clothes Malchut de AA, it is not the
actual Malchut de Atik, but only Behinat He’arah from its Malchut,
since Malchut de Atik is concealed in RADLA and does not manifest
(item 23).
It is written, “These two bottom Prakin de NH de Atik in Olam
Beria are uncovered, without Levush.” This means that the bottom
thirds de NHY de Atik expand equally with the Raglaim of AK in BYA.
However, they are regarded as lacking Yesod and Malchut.
This is so because there is only Tikun Kavim in the form of the
association of Midat ha Rachamim with Din, extending from
Tzimtzum Bet. Since this Hitpashtut is from Behinat Tzimtzum Aleph,
hence, there is no Tikun of the middle Kav there, and thus it is only
considered as being in two Kavim, right and left, without sweetening.

--- PAGE 709 ---
Thus, there is only the Behinat two bottom thirds de Netzah and Hod
there, without Yesod and Malchut, but Malchut is contained in Hod.
Dadei Behema, which are below the Raglaim, from which the
Melachim that descended in Beria.
It has already been explained (Ohr Pnimi item 42) how the birth of a
Partzuf makes it fall to the Separated BYA. This is because the Masach
upon which the Zivug Elyon for the Koma of the Partzuf comes from
the Behinat Guf of the Nekudim that illuminated in BYA. Hence, this
force that the Reshimot that the Masach consists of remains to shine in
BYA.
However, when the Masach is purified from all the Aviut de Guf that
was in it, this mixture of He’arat BYA was not apparent in it either,
meaning as long as it was contained in the Zivug de Rosh.
Yet, after the Aviut of the Guf in the Masach was recognized, the force
of He’arat BYA that was in it immediately appeared, and it was
separated from the Rosh and descended to its place in BYA. Thus, its
birth, meaning the recognition of the Aviut de Guf in the Masach,
separates it from the Behinat Elyon and brings it to its place, making it
fall to BYA.
This is the conduct in all the Partzufim de Atzilut, since they all came
out of the Masach de Guf Nekudim that illuminated in BYA, except
Partzuf Atik, which was truly corrected to be able to expand to BYA, as
it clothes the Atzmut Malchut de AK prior to Tzimtzum Bet.
The principal Tikun, sufficient to raise them to Atzilut once more, is
the separation of the force of He’arat BYA from them, and the
attainment of the strong force of Sium of Tzimtzum Bet, being Behinat
Malchut de AA that contains all the force of Sium of Atzilut. This is the
meaning of Dadei Behema, which are the Behinat two bottom thirds
de Netzah Hod de Atik found in BYA.
They joined and connected and were corrected in a single association
with Malchut de AA. By joining both of them, they became corrected

--- PAGE 710 ---
Dadei Behema to bestow the strong force of Tzimtzum Bet in Malchut
de AA.
It is written, “These two bottom Prakin de NH de Atik in Olam
Beria are uncovered, without Levush. They joined together and
clothed in Malchut de AA.” This is so because then they can suck the
Shefa de Atzilut although they stand in BYA, as they receive He’arat
Malchut de AA through the two bottom thirds de NH de Atik that are in
the same Olam as theirs. Finally, they receive the Behinat Sium de
Atzilut and rise to their place in Atzilut.
They are called Dadei Behema because Malchut is called this when
she is without the sweetening from Midat ha Rachamim. Their
opposite is Dadei Adam, indicating that Malchut is sweetened in
Midat ha Rachamim. This is the meaning of standing in Komat Bina,
which is the Shoresh of Rachamim. For that reason they are connected
in the place of the heart, which is Bina, and not below in the Raglaim,
where there is gripping for the Klipot, as it is written, “Her feet go
down to death.” Hence, it is the place of Erva, meaning there is
gripping to the exteriors. This is also the meaning of Behema being
BON in Gimatria.
46. Thus we have explained how ZA receives his Mochin, which is the
Ohr of his true inner Atzmut. When he is in Gadlut, they come to
him clothed inside the Achoraim de NHY de Ima and NHY de
Abba. All the Partzufim are like that too, because the NHY of the
Elyon, their Hitzoniut, becomes a Levush to the Mochin of the
Partzuf below it and everything enters and expands in Rosh and
Guf to that lower Partzuf.
Ohr Pnimi
46. All the Partzufim are like that too, because the NHY of the Elyon,
their Hitzoniut, becomes a Levush to the Mochin of the Parzuf
below it, and everything enters and expands in Rosh and Guf to
that lower Parzuf: It is has already been thoroughly explained (Ohr
Pnimi item 42) that the matter of NHY de Elyon which clothe in the
Tachton, they are NHY de Eser Sefirot de Rosh, that come out in Rosh

--- PAGE 711 ---
de Elyon in the power of the Tachton’s Hitkalelut in Zivug de Rosh de
Elyon, that those additional NHY are not at all NHY de Eser Sefirot de
Elyon for they are below its Koma. For example, the NHY de Rosh de
Atik, they are NHY de Komat Keter, but the NHY that were added to
Atik due to Hitkalelut AA in Behinat MAN there, those are NHY de
Komat Hochma. This is why Rav precisely writes: “their Hitzoniut,
becomes a Levush of the Mochin of the Partzuf below it”, because the
Koma de Behina Gimel is called Hitzoniut to the Koma de Behina
Dalet, and AA took only the NHY de Behina Gimel, thus he had taken
only the Hitzoniut de NHY de Atik. Similarly, all the Partzufim, are not
actually taking NHY de Elyon, but NHY de Komat the Tachton while it
is included in the Elyon, which is always one degree lower than de
Elyon and thus is called Hitzoniut de Elyon, or Achoraim de NHY de
Elyon, And Remember this.
Here are those NHY de Elyon becomes Levush to the Mochin de
Tachton and go down with it as it goes out from Rosh de Elyon to its
place. Because the essence of Koma’s light clothe those NHY, and
NHY are clothed with the Mochin in Kelim of the Tachton in such a
way that those NHY they are a means between the Orot de Tachton
and the Kelim de Tachton.
Also know that those NHY contains complete Eser Sefirot Rosh and
Guf like there are to the Mochin which receive inside them, Because
Netzah and Hod are the Kelim de GAR and in them Clothe HBD of the
Mochin. And Yesod is the Kli to all the ZAT of the Mochin which are
HGT NHYM, like it is written in front of us.
47. There is no Mochin that is less than three Behinot HB and Daat.
Hochma is the Hesed line, Bina is the Gevura line and Daat is
divided into two: half Hesed and half Gevura. This is in order to
determine between them, as it is written, “for the Lord is a God of
knowledge,” two Daats (pl. for Daat). Also, Hesed is considered
five Hassadim and Gevura, five Gevurot, as mentioned in Idrat
Nasso (in the Zohar).
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 712 ---
47. There is no Mochin that is less than three Behinot HB and Daat.
Hochma is the Hesed line, Bina is the Gevura line and Daat is
divided into two: half Hesed and half Gevura: Since those things
are the keys for all the Mochin de Atzilut, it is fitting that we Shall
speak at length about them. It has already been explained above that
all the heads that came out in the beginning, in Atzilut’s Tikun, even in
their Zivug de Gadlut, were as Panim be Achor. Since Bina de Rosh
doesn’t change her nature because of the Gadlut and always stands in
Achoraim to Abba (Ohr Pnimi item 31), it follows that Bina de Rosh is
stopping ZON de Rosh from spreading from within her to the outside.
Because ZON only reveals outside of Bina in He’arat Hochma as in
ZON de Ohr Yashar, which have already become known, and since
Bina is in Achoraim to Abba and doesn’t contain anything but Ohr de
Hassadim, ZON are included within her and does not reveal outside.
Now you can understand why the Heads de Atzilut are known as GAR,
because they have nothing but KHB, and ZON are missing within
them due to Bina standing in Achoraim to Abba and does not return
her Panim back to Abba, apart from raising MAN.
Now you can understand the origin of Moach HaDaat, because by the
raising of MAN, Bina is awakened and comes back Panim be Panim
with Abba and they bring out Komat Eser Sefirot on the Man. And
then ZON are born and reveal in Rosh de Elyon itself, where they were
missing until now because of Achoraim de Bina. And now that Bina
came back Panim be Panim, now ZON de Rosh reveal out of them in
He’arat Hochma as they are worthy. And this new ZON that revealed
in Rosh are called Daat, since they are really only Rosh’s ZAT, which
were now added by the raising of the MAN.
And even though they are only ZON, still they have complete Eser
Sefirot GAR and ZAT, because they have He’arat Hochma within
them. Therefore, it is then distinct, that HGT becomes HBD and NH
within them became ZON. Although in their origin they have nothing
but Hey Hassadim for ZA within Daat, which are HGT NH de
Hassadim and Hey Gevurot for Nukva within Daat, which are HGT
NH de Gevurot. But the Bet Hassadim de Hesed and Gevura and the

--- PAGE 713 ---
upper third within Tifferet returns to be HBD by the power of He’arat
Hochma within them. And so does the Bet and third Gevurot, which
are Hesed and Gevura and the upper third within Tifferet, from the
Nukva, also became HBD by the power of He’arat Hochma. But now
they are connected together and are considered one.
It has already been explained above, in the previous item, that NHY de
Elyon, which are the clothing of the Mochin, are also divided to Eser
Sefirot, That is, they are divided to there thirds, on the three Kavim:
Netzah, Hod, Yesod. That the right Kav which is Netzah is divided to
three thirds: Hochma Hesed, Netzah. So does the left Kav which is
Hod is divided to three thirds: Bina, Gevura, Hod. And so does the
middle Kav which is Yesod is divided into three thirds: Daat, Tifferet,
Yesod and Malchut.
It is written: “Hochma is the Hesed line, Bina is the Gevura line and
Daat is divided into two: half Hesed and half Gevura”.
It has already been explained above in the previous item, that Netzah
and Hod are Kelim de GAR of the Daat and Yesod is the Kli de ZAT of
the Daat, and accordingly, the same two and a half upper Hassadim
with the two and a half upper Gevurot, which are HGT down to the
Chazeh, returned to become HBD. Now Hochma has clothed in the
right line which are the three thirds within Netzah, and has divided
there into Hochma, Hesed, Netzah; and they are all as Hochma. And
Bina has clothed in the left line, which are three thirds within Hod,
and has divided there into Bina, Gevura, Hod, and they are all as Bina.
Daat de Elyon within GAR de Daat, which is called the hidden Daat,
has clothed in upper third de Tifferet. Now it is clear that GAR de Daat
are HGT, which returned to become HBD. And ZON in Daat, which
are the two and two thirds of Hassadim, and two and two thirds of
Gevurot, which are two lower thirds of Tifferet, and NH, which were
left in the Hassadim and Gevurot, double themselves and becomes
complete Hey Hassadim and complete Hey Gevurot. Hey Hassadim
are ZA in Daat de ZAT and Hey Gevurot are Nukva in that Daat, and
both of them are clothed in the three thirds within the middle line of

--- PAGE 714 ---
Kli de Yesod which are Daat, Tifferet, Yesod, and they are all only as
Daat.
48. There is no Mochin that is less than three Behinot HB and Daat.
Hochma is the Hesed line, Bina is the Gevura line and Daat is
divided into two: half Hesed and half Gevura. This is in order to
determine between them, as it is written, “for the Lord is a God of
knowledge,” two Daats (pl. for Daat). Also, Hesed is considered
five Hassadim and Gevura, five Gevurot, as mentioned in Idrat
Nasso (in the Zohar).
Ohr Pnimi
46. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
49. There were two Daats in Zeir Anpin, one from Mochin that were
extended to him from Abba and one from Mochin that were
extended to him from NHY de Ima. Each of them consists of five
Hassadim and five Gevurot.
50. The reason for it is that after all he also receives Mochin de AA by
Hitlabshut NHY de Atik in itself. Atik does not have two separate
Partzufim, Dechura and Nukva. Rather, they are both one Partzuf.
Hence, there were two Partzufim there in ZA de AVI. Two Behinot
Mochin entered: one in NHY de Abba and one in NHY de Ima.
However, in this Atik Dechura and his Nukva, they all form one
Partzuf.
For that reason there are only three separate Mochin in AA. This
is also why he has only one Daat with five Hassadim from the
Dechura side, the MA in him, and five Gevurot from the Nukva
side, the name BON in him, since all is one Behinat HaVaYaH.
51. Remember and do not forget that rule that always, in all the
Partzufim of Atzilut, all the Hassadim extend from the name New
MA that comes to correct the Atzilut, and all the Gevurot from the
name BON of the sorts of the Melachim. This is also the meaning
of the Zivug to sweeten the Nukva Gevurot named BON that are

--- PAGE 715 ---
now being sorted anew in every single Zivug as MAN by the
Hassadim from which the new MA extends.
52. Also, it has already been explained there that what Atik sorted in
the first time was to correct the Atzmut of Partzuf AA in the
beginning of its correction and placed them in AA as Mochin.
Partzuf AA Zachar and Nukva was made of these HG that Atik
placed in AA in the first time. They remain there permanently and
when AA also returns to sort for AVI, to correct them for the first
time, the Zivug of Atik Zachar and Nukva must precede it. After
that they return to extend new Mochin to AA and Nukva so that
they can sort the parts of AVI.
Afterwards the new HG come to them, the Hassadim from the
name MA and the Gevurot from the name BON. Then the parts of
AVI are erected there inside the AA, as mentioned there.
Thus, there are two kinds of Hassadim and Gevurot: one, this is
the first, to correct the Partzuf; two, the new ones, which extend in
every single Zivug and every single time. These do not stay there
permanently; they are only erected and the form of the fetus is
made of them, and it is born there.
Ohr Pnimi
51. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
53. *I have notified you before that there is Behinat Atik and Nukva,
AA and Nukva, and AVI and ZON. However, there is a difference
regarding the above-mentioned Nekevot. The Nekeva is Dinim, and
is from the sorts of the Melachim. How then can the name Nekeva
be right there in Atik and AA, which are totally Rachamim, as
we’ve mentioned in the two Idrot (Zohar)?
Moreover, the existence of Zachar and Nekeva indicates
diminution and separation. There is no greater unity as when the
Zachar is alone.

--- PAGE 716 ---
We have found in many place places in the Zohar and in Idra
Raba (a Parasha in the Zohar): “In that image of Adam there
exists a rule of Dechura and Nukva, which is not so in Atik. We
also find in many places that Behinot Zachar and Nekeva did not
begin but from AVI downward.
It is thus mentioned in the Idra Zuta (a parasha in the Zohar):
“That Hochma expanded, and you find Dechura and Nukva.”
Hochma is the father, Bina, the mother, and because of it there is
Zachar and Nukva.
Thus, why do we say that there is Behinat Nukva even in Atik and
AA? We find the opposite of that in many places, especially in
Parashat Bereshit (in the Zohar): “The reason of all reasons said
that called, ‘See now that I, even I, am He, and there is no god
with Me’.
There is one that merges, such as Dechura and Nukva, and he said
about him: ‘I called him one, but he is one, not counted and not
merged. Because of that he said ‘there is no god with Me,’ which is
Behinat Nukva, called Elohim, which is Din.”
Ohr Pnimi
52. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
54. In order to reconcile these texts, you should know that in all the
Eser Sefirot there are certainly Zachar and Nukva, but there is a
dispute in how they are present. The explanation of the matter is
that most of the death is in ZON since the seven Melachim that
died were in them.
Hence there is Zachar and Nukva in separate Partzufim from one
another. The reason you sometimes find them joined is only when
they are Achor be Achor. This is because at that time their
Achoraim are attached together, one wall serves both, and a
separation of the Achor is required to separate them.

--- PAGE 717 ---
Ohr Pnimi
53. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
55. However, in AVI there was annulment and not actual death as it
was in ZON. Hence there were separate Behinot Zachar and
Nekeva in them too, meaning regarded as two Partzufim, as in
ZON.
Yet, there is a great cohesion added there, which is that they are
always attached together Panim be Panim in one wall that serves
both. There is no separation between them whatsoever as in ZON,
which connect when they are Achor be Achor and separate when
they are Panim be Panim.
Ohr Pnimi
54. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
56. This is the reason that they said in many places in the Zohar that
AVI never stops the joint connection, they emerge as one and
remain as one; one is not separated from the other. Hence their
Zivug is perpetual and unending.
57. However, in AA, which is considered the Keter of the Nekudot,
even the cancellation did not occur although it is from the last five
of Keter de BON.
It is known that there was some annulment in the NHY of Keter de
Nekudim when they descended to become Mochin for AVI. Hence
there was also Behinot ZON in it, but a correction and additional
connection was added to them, being that both were one Partzuf,
the Zachar and Nekeva in it. Thus, the Behinat name MA in it is
placed in each right side and the Behinat name BON in it was on
the left side in it, and both were cleaved together as one Partzuf.

--- PAGE 718 ---
Ohr Pnimi
56. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
58. This is the meaning of what is written in the Zohar that Keter is a
single Zachar without a Nukva, meaning without a separate
Nukva. When we say that there are Zachar and Nukva it is because
these two Behinot MA and BON are in it, on its right and on its
left. They are Behinot Zachar and Nekeva in every place, but not
that it has separate ZON in two Partzufim; examine that deeply.
Now you can see how AVI clothe AA on its right and on its left. It
is so because this is how it is in AA itself; the right side in it is MA
Dechura and the left side is BON Nukva.
59. In Atik Yomin, which is considered the First Hey of the Keter of
Nekudim, there was never any cancellation. Hence, Behinot Zachar
and Nekeva in it, namely MA and BON, become completely mixed
and they are entirely mingled in one another on the right, in itself,
and on its left, and they are not like AA.
This is the meaning of what is written in the Zohar (Idra Raba),
“there is no left in that blocked Atik, it is all right.” The thing is
that in AA the Zachar is on the right and the Nekeva on the left.
Yet, in Atik Yomin, its right side consists of MA and BON, and also
on the left side.
Hence they are equal and there is no difference between its right
and its left. However, the Behinot Nekeva and Zachar in it are in a
different form, meaning they are two Behinot right and left. It
means that there is also Behinat MA from the Panim side and
Behinat BON from the Achor side between its right side and its left
side. In that it is a great and wonderful connection.
Ohr Pnimi
58. AK contains.

--- PAGE 719 ---
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
60. *Know, that Upper AVI were made thus: Abba from the Nekeva,
Upper half of Bina de MA and Ima from the Zachar, completely
Hochma de BON. Yet, it is called Hochma de BON Ima since it is
Behinat BON. Bina de MA is called Hochma since it is de MA, and
examine that. It turns out that in fact they are both called only
Hochma and they are Behinat First Yod in the Name.
Ohr Pnimi
59. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
61. Ima is many times greater than Abba in three aspects: One,
because this is half Bina de MA and this is complete Hochma de
BON. Two, because one is Hochma and the other is Bina. Three,
because one is MA and the other is BON, whose merit is greater
than MA since it is Behinat SAG. This is because it is known that
the Melachim that died are all SAG.
Hence, you find that Ima now came out concealed and clothed
inside Abba, and because of all these reasons both are called Abba,
or only Hochma, as she is not at all apparent. For that reason they
are both the Yod in the Name, since VAD (Vav and Dalet) in the
filling of Yod is shaped as Hey.
This is so because Ima is concealed inside the Yod and is not
mentioned, but only a simple Yod which is Abba. This is the
meaning of “crown to her husband.”
Ohr Pnimi
60. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
62. Israel Saba was made of the lower half of Bina de MA and Tvuna
from complete Bina de BON and then both are considered Bina de

--- PAGE 720 ---
MA and BON. Hence, they are both regarded as only Bina, and
this is the First Hey in the Name.
In that state Abba is hidden and concealed since he is the Yod of
the filling Hey Yod. This is because now she has no merit over him,
as now they are both from Behinat Bina. Since he is Behinat
Zachar he overpowers her. However, in AVI the Ima has a great
advantage over Abba.
Ohr Pnimi
61. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
63. It turns out that in fact Abba is the general Upper AVI, the Yod in
the Name and Ima is the general Israel Saba ve Tvuna, the First
Hey in the Name. However, sometimes we call Abba and Israel
Saba – Abba, since they are both Bina de MA, and Bina and Tvuna
– Ima, since they are both only BON, which is Nekeva.
Now you can see what is written in a different place about “and I
will not come in fury” that Zivug Israel Saba ve Tvuna is Zivug de
Lo Pasik called Zivug Bina and Bina. But, “and I will not come in
fury” is Hochma with Bina, which is Upper AVI, whose Zivug
stops.
It is told in another interpretation that “Ima came out from
between the arms of Abba”. This is the meaning of YESHSUT,
called “Ima came out from under the two arms of the Upper AVI”,
called that they both come alone.
Ohr Pnimi
62. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
64. *
65.

--- PAGE 721 ---
Ohr Pnimi
64. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
66.
Ohr Pnimi
65. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
67.
Ohr Pnimi
66. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
68.
Ohr Pnimi
67. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
69.
70.
71.
72. *
Ohr Pnimi
71. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
73.
Ohr Pnimi
72. AK contains.

--- PAGE 722 ---
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
74.
Ohr Pnimi
73. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
75.
*Ohr Pnimi
74. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
76.
77. *
Ohr Pnimi
76. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
78.
Ohr Pnimi
77. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
79.
80.
Ohr Pnimi
79. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
81.
82.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 723 ---
81. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
83.
Ohr Pnimi
82. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
84.
85.
Ohr Pnimi
84. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
86.
87.
Ohr Pnimi
86. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
88.
Ohr Pnimi
87. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
89. *
Ohr Pnimi
88. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
90.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 724 ---
89. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
91.
Ohr Pnimi
90. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
92.
Ohr Pnimi
91. The Se’arot of its Rosh are opposite the braches of AB, and the
Se’arot
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
93.
Ohr Pnimi
92. AK contains.
Orot stem from it, which are its branches.
94.
OceanofPDF.com

--- PAGE 725 ---
PART SIXTEEN
The Three Olamot Beria Yetzira Assiya
42. * It is written in the Zohar (Kedoshim) about the secretes of the
Torah: “Adam ha Rishon did not have anything of Olam ha Zeh.
One righteous made use of his Nukva, and one Guf was made of
that usage, whose Ohr is more than all those angels above etc.”
First, I will explain a certain matter that I had briefly heard from
my teacher and then I will elaborate more as much as I heard
later on.
43. Adam ha Rishon had no part of Olam ha Zeh, which is Olam
Assiya. His Guf was from Olam Yetzira, his Nefesh from Olam
Beria, his Ruach from Nukva de ZA de Atzilut, and his Neshama
from ZA de Atzilut. Also, He had Neshama to Neshama from Abba
ve Ima de Atzilut.
Ohr Pnimi
43. His Guf was from Olam Yetzira, his Nefesh from Olam Beria, his
Ruach from Nukva de ZA de Atzilut, and his Neshama from ZA de
Atzilut. Also, He had Neshama to Neshama from Abba ve Ima de
Atzilut.
We need a close examination here to compare this short text with the
elaborate text presented later and with the rest of the articles regarding
that matter. We must know that before the sin of Etz ha Daat Adam
had two Behinot NRN; he had NRN from BYA and also NRN from
Atzilut.
He also had a Malbush Hitzon on them like the current corporeal Guf
about which it is said, “Then the Lord God formed man off the dust of
the ground etc.” It is presented below that all the Olamot were on a
higher level than they are now because from the current Chazeh de

--- PAGE 726 ---
Yetzira downward was Mador ha Klipot, ZA de Atzilut was in the
place of Abba and Nukva in the place of Ima.
Beria in the place of ZA de Atzilut and GAR de Yetzira in the place of
Nukva de Atzilut. The bottom six of Yetzira in the place of the top six
of the current Beria, GAR de Assiya in the place of the bottom four of
the current Beria, and the bottom six of Assiya in the place of the top
six of the current Yetzira. This is because the Sium Raglin was in the
place of the current Chazeh de Yetzira (see item 55).
The Malbush Hitzon of Adam ha Rishon was made of Malchut de
Assiya called “dust off the earth” and indeed the place of Beit ha
Mikdash was built from this Beria de Malchut. However, Assiya was
then completely above the current Chazeh de Yetzira.
Afterwards he had NRN from BYA, he had Nefesh Ruach from Assiya
and Yetzira, which are also called “Behinat Guf” of Adam ha Rishon,
because the VAK are called Guf. Finally, he had Neshama from Beria.
After that he had NRN from Atzilut, Nefesh from Nukva de Atzilut that
was clothed in Olam Yetzira, and for the clothing of Nukva in Olam
Yetzira, which is Behinat ZA. For this reason this Nefesh is named
Ruach.
He had Ruach from ZA de Atzilut which is clothed in Olam Beria and
for the dressing of ZA in Beria, which is Behinat Neshama and
YESHSUT. Hence, this Ruach is named Neshama. In addition, he had
Neshama to Neshama from ZON de Atzilut, which are then in the
place of Abba ve Ima.
It is written, “His Guf was from Olam Yetzira,” meaning his Behinot
Ruach Nefesh, called VAK or Guf, were both from Olam Yetzira. This
is because the past Assiya stood above Chazeh de Yetzira and was thus
considered that her Nefesh, which also received from Assiya, is also
Behinat Yetzira compared to now.
It is written, “his Nefesh from Olam Beria.” It means that he had
Behinat Neshama from Olam Beria, meaning his Behinat Neshama
was from Olam Beria and it is called Nefesh relating to Nefesh de

--- PAGE 727 ---
Atzilut. This is the meaning of “his Ruach from Nukva de ZA de
Atzilut,” meaning from the part of Nukva clothed in the past GAR de
Yetzira. It is called Ruach because of the Hitlabshut in Olam Yetzira
which is Behinat ZA and Ruach.
This is the meaning of “and his Neshama from ZA de Atzilut.” In
other words it is from the part of ZA clothed in Olam Beria. It is called
Neshama even though everything that comes from ZA is only Ruach.
This is because of his Hitlabshut in Beria, which is Behinat Neshama
and Behinat YESHSUT.
It is written, “Also, He had Neshama to Neshama from Abba ve
Ima,” meaning from ZON that rose and clothed AVI. This is because
ZA rose to the place of Abba and Nukva to the place of Ima.
44. The reason why he had no part in Olam Assiya is what we will
explain about the order of the world and its division. Its place of
ruin is opposite the Klipa, and the settled world is divided into
many divisions: Hutz la Eretz is opposite Assiya and the whole of
Eretz Israel is opposite Yetzira.
It is written in the Zohar, “The firmaments of Assiya exist on Eretz
Israel to defend it etc.” The place of Beit ha Mikdash is opposite
Beria and the Kodesh Kodashim is opposite the Upper Heichal
Kodesh Kodashim of Beria.
45. It turns out that since Adam ha Rishon was created from the place
of his repentance, the Olam was always in the form of Beria. After
he had sinned, he was created in the weekdays. We have already
explained in Parashat Pekudei that Adam ha Rishon was created
by Zivug ZA and its Nukva, who rose up to the Heichal of Abba ve
Ima where they mated Panim be Panim and procreated Adam and
Hava.
46. For that reason ZA was then in the form of Neshama, which is
Bina, and his Nukva was in the form of Ruach, which is ZA. It is
said in that regard in the Zohar, “a man’s soul is the candle of
God” that Neshama is Dechura from the Upper Great Tree, and
Ruach is from the Small Tree.

--- PAGE 728 ---
Ohr Pnimi
46. ZA was then in the form of Neshama, which is Bina, and his
Nukva was in the form of Ruach, which is ZA etc. called Neshama
after ZA being up in the place of Bina etc. called Ruach after his
Nukva having been at that time in the place of her husband ZA.
It is seemingly perplexing that he contradicts his own words. He says
above that ZON rose up to Heichal Abba ve Ima, and below in the part
(item 57) he says that ZA rose to the place of Bina and Nukva to the
place of ZA.
The thing is that this speaks of ZA and Nukva that remained below
clothed in Olam Yetzira and Beria. When ZA is clothed in Olam Beria
it must give her from Bina de Atzilut because Beria receives only from
Bina, as she is Behinat Bina de Guf and a Behina receives only from
its corresponding Behina in the Elyon.
This is the meaning of the text “called Neshama after ZA being up
in the place of Bina,” meaning he gives to Beria by receiving the Ohr
above the Ohr from the place of Bina, which is the corresponding
Behina of Beria.
It is written, “called Ruach after his Nukva having been at that
time in the place of her husband Yodin.” This is because the Nukva
that clothed in Olam Yetzira cannot give to Yetzira but only from the
Ohr of ZA which is ascribed to Behinat Yetzira.
In order to give to Yetzira, she must be for her in the place of ZA,
hence the Ohr is named after ZA, which is Ruach. Nonetheless, ZON
themselves are on a higher degree because Nukva is in the place of
Ima, which is YESHSUT, and ZA is in the place of Abba, which is the
Upper AVI.
47. The thing is that ZA, which is Dechura Great Upper Tree, where
the Neshama of Adam ha Rishon came from, called Neshama after
ZA being up in the place of Bina. The Ruach of Adam is from
Nukva de ZA Small Tree, Nukva, called Ruach after his Nukva

--- PAGE 729 ---
having been at that time in the place of her husband ZA, as
explained there in the Zohar.
48. After Adam ha Rishon sinned in Etz ha Daat, which is Olam Assiya
that he was commanded not to eat from since he had no part in
Assiya but only from Yetzira upward. Since he broke it and ate
from Etz ha Daat, which is Assiya, he flawed all the Olamot. Hence,
they all descended from their degree because Yetzira clothed in
Assiya.
Ohr Pnimi
48. In Etz ha Daat, which is Olam Assiya that he was commanded not
to eat from since he had no part in Assiya but only from Yetzira
upward.
The meaning of the Mitzva that he was told not to eat from Etz ha
Daat stems from the Sium Raglin of the three Olamot BYA that was on
the current Chazeh de Yetzira. This was the end of the zone of the
Kedusha and from there down was Mador ha Klipot.
It is so because only the first nine of the eight broken Melachim were
sorted, which are the 248 Nitzotzin. However, their Malchuiot fell
from the Chazeh down to the general place of BYA, which are the
eight Malchuiot. Each of them consists of four Behinot, which are 32
in Gimatria, and they became the Klipot that are not good for
anything, called Lev ha Even (The Stony Heart).
This is so because they are not sorted at all before the end of
correction when Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph that was concealed in
RADLA will appear. Then, even SAM will be a holy angel, as then “He
will swallow up death for ever.”
It is written, “he was commanded not to eat from since he had no
part in Assiya but only from Yetzira upward,” meaning the current
Assiya that is clothed in Mador ha Klipot and has contact with the
above Lev ha Even. This is because the past Assiya ended entirely
above the Chazeh of the general place of BYA which is above the
current Chazeh de Yetzira.

--- PAGE 730 ---
Because of this Sium he was given the commandment of prohibition
on eating the Etz ha Daat so that he would have no contact with the
Klipot that cling to Assiya, meaning the Achoraim of Assiya that
remained Achor be Achor. He was forbidden to eat the Etz ha Daat,
meaning to extend He’arah to the Achoraim since the Shefa would
reach the Kelim in the above-mentioned Lev ha Even, and he would
die as in the case of the breaking of the vessels.
Since he broke it and ate from Etz ha Daat, which is Assiya, he
flawed all the Olamot. Hence, they all descended from their degree
because Yetzira clothed in Assiya.
It means in the past Olam Assiya too, when he stood at the first six of
the current Olam Yetzira. It was therefore considered Olam Yetzira
since the Tachton that stands in the place of the Elyon becomes like
him (see item 60). Hence, now after the sin of Etz ha Daat he fell to
the Behinat current Assiya that stands clothed in Mador ha Klipot.
Also, the reason why the eating of Etz ha Daat caused the Hitlabshut
of Assiya in the Klipot will be explained below (item 52).
49. It follows, that Eretz Israel that was opposite Yetzira does not
receive from it but through Assiya because Yetzira is clothed in it.
Also, Beria is clothed in Yetzira, Nukva de Atzilut clothed in Beria
and ZA clothed in its Nukva. Similarly, all the Elyonim of it
descended from their degree.
Ohr Pnimi
49. Eretz Israel that was opposite Yetzira does not receive from it but
through Assiya.
Prior to the sin, Yetzira was in the place of Beria, the Upper four of
Nukva de ZA in the place of Nukva de ZA and the lower six in the
place of the Upper six of Beria. Then, Eretz Israel, which is opposite
the Yetzira received from the current Beria.
After the sin, the Upper six of Yetzira fell inside the past Assiya, and
the bottom four of Yetzira fell to the place of the Klipot. This is so

--- PAGE 731 ---
because from Chazeh de Yetzira downward they fell to Mador ha
Klipot which is from the Chazeh down of the place of BYA.
Thus, Eretz Israel cannot receive from its corresponding Behina,
which is Yetzira, except through Assiya from before the sin, meaning
according to the state that was in the first Behina when Adam ha
Rishon was born.
Beria is clothed in Yetzira, Nukva de Atzilut clothed in Beria and
ZA clothed in its Nukva.
Beria that stood at the place of ZA de Atzilut descended below Parsa
because of the sin to the place of the bottom six of Yetzira from before
the sin, meaning the state at the time of the birth of Adam ha Rishon.
ZA, which stood in the place of Upper Abba, descended to the place of
the Nukva, to its Behinat from the Chazeh down, belonging to its
Nukva and became Behinat VAK without a Rosh.
Thus, the principle state is the state of the Olamot prior to the sin,
meaning in the first Behina at the time of the birth of the Neshama of
Adam ha Rishon. ZA was in the place of Abba, its Nukva in the place
of Ima and Beria in the place of ZA. GAR de Yetzira in the place of
Nukva de ZA and her VAK in the place of the top six de Yetzira
through the Chazeh.
After the sin ZA fell from its Chazeh downward and became VAK
without a Rosh, and Nukva a Nekuda. Beria fell below Parsa in the
place of the bottom six of Yetzira and the top four of the past Assiya.
Yetzira fell to the place of the bottom six de Assiya and the top four of
Mador ha Klipot and Assiya fell all the way down to the Eser Sefirot
of Mador ha Klipot.
Know, that these bottom four of Yetzira from her Chazeh down when
she fell to Mador ha Klipot are sometimes called Malchut de Yetzira
because anything from the Chazeh down of any degree is considered
Malchut.
His Guf is from Olam ha Zeh, his Nefesh from Assiya and his
Ruach from Yetzira, the place where his Guf first was.

--- PAGE 732 ---
This is because the Guf of Adam is always from Malchut de Assiya,
called “dust” and the Malbush Hitzon of its NRN is made of it (Ohr
Pnimi item 43). The place of the sin when Olam Assiya was in the
place of the first six de Yetzira up to the Chazeh, his Behinat Guf was
also made of the Behinat current Yetzira because the Tachton that rises
to the place of the Elyon becomes like him.
After he sinned in Etz ha Daat and all Eser Sefirot de Assiya fell to the
place of the Klipot his Guf was made of Olam ha Zeh, which is
Behinat Malchut of the current Olam Assiya. His Nefesh was made of
the Upper nine de Assiya and his Ruach was made of the current Olam
Yetzira in the place of the bottom six of the past Assiya.
Also, his Neshama was made of the current Beria in the place of the
bottom six of the former Yetzira and he completely lost the NRN de
Atzilut that he had prior to the sin. You should also know that these
NRN de Beria that the Rav mentions do not mean that they remained
in him after the sin. This is because after the sin nothing was left in
him but Nefesh de Nefesh, as the Rav wrote in Shaar HaPsukim.
Rather, it means that after he had repented, he acquired NRN from
BYA once again.
50. Now the Nefesh of Adam was from Nukva de ZA that descended in
the place of Nefesh in Beria, and his Ruach was from ZA that
descended in the place of his Nukva. In that, the text that states
that Nefesh and Ruach are Malchut and Tifferet is correct and
does not dispute with the article of Sabba, which speaks of after
the sin of Adam.
Ohr Pnimi
50. Now the Nefesh of Adam was from Nukva de ZA that descended in
the place of Nefesh in Beria, and his Ruach was from ZA that
descended in the place of his Nukva etc. does not dispute with the
article of Sabba, which speaks of after the sin.
Explanation: After the sin ZA came down to Behinat VAK and he is his
Behinat from the Chazeh down, which belongs to Nukva. Thus, ZA

--- PAGE 733 ---
descended to the degree of Nukva from before, and Nukva herself
descended to a single Nekuda under the Yesod. Her bottom nine
descended to Olam Beria, and you find that the Nukva descended to
Beria.
This is the meaning of the words of the Rav that when he says that
Nefesh is from Nukva and Ruach from ZA, he speaks of after the sin of
Adam ha Rishon, when ZA became VAK and the Nukva a Nekuda
under Yesod.
It is written, “In that, the text that states that Nefesh and Ruach
are Malchut and Tifferet is correct and does not dispute with the
article of Sabba, which speaks of after the sin.” It means that it will
not disagree with the text of the Sabba because the Sabba speaks of
after the sin, and the words that speak after the sin relate to his words
that NR are Tifferet and Malchut.
51. Now you see how many degrees Adam ha Rishon fell. In the
beginning his Guf was from Yetzira and now his Guf is from Olam
ha Zeh, his Nefesh from Assiya and his Ruach from Yetzira, the
place where his Guf first was.
52. Do not be surprised if you will find several places in the Zohar
where Etz ha Daat is good, Matatron, and bad, Sam’el. This is
because Etz ha Daat is not only in Assiya where there are Klipot
mixed with Kedusha. However, after Yetzira came down and
clothed in Assiya, Yetzira is called “Etz ha Daat of good and bad”,
the name of Assiya. Thus we have thoroughly explained what was
Etz ha Daat.
Ohr Pnimi
52. Etz ha Daat is good, Matatron, and bad, Sam’el etc. However, after
Yetzira came down and clothed in Assiya, Yetzira is called “Etz ha
Daat of good and bad”, the name of Assiya.
Interpretation: After the sin the Upper six of Yetzira fell to the place of
the lower six of Assiya and her lower half from the Chazeh down fell
to the place of the Klipot. Hence, she is now half good, meaning her

--- PAGE 734 ---
KHB HGT through the Chazeh, where she stands above Mador ha
Klipot. She is also half bad, meaning her TNHYM from the Chazeh
down, clothed in Mador ha Klipot where the Tachtonim cannot receive
the He’arat Yetzira except when it passes through the Klipot.
This is the meaning of “good, Matatron”, meaning the Behinat from
the Chazeh upward in her, and “bad, Sam’el”, meaning the Behinat
from the Chazeh down in her, clothed in Mador ha Klipot, whose
Rosh is called “Sam’el”. This is the meaning of Etz ha Daat of good
and bad: good from the perspective of Matatron and bad from the
perspective of Sam’el. All this occurred because of the sin of Etz ha
Daat, though before the sin Etz ha Daat was only in Assiya.
We must understand that, since before the sin Olam Assiya too had no
contact with Mador ha Klipot. Thus, why was Olam Assiya in a state
of Etz ha Daat of good and bad? Moreover, according to what the Rav
writes below (item 87), that on the eve of Shabbat in the twilight,
before the sin of Adam ha Rishon, all of BYA rose to Atzilut, and
Yetzira and Assiya rose to the place of ZON de Atzilut and were Panim
be Panim?
After all, Olam Assiya was already in the place of Nukva de Atzilut
with all her Eser Sefirot, and how does he say here that she was in a
state of Etz ha Daat of good and bad? It must not be said that the sin
was before that, since after the sin the Olamot had already fallen.
They also say in Masechet Sanhedrin that he sinned on the tenth hour,
was sentenced on the eleventh, and was expelled from Gan Eden on
the twelfth. Thus, the sin was after the twilight, and how are there
good and bad in Assiya that rose to Atzilut, since it is written about
Atzilut that “evil shall not sojourn with Thee”?
When you study the book Shaar HaPsukim, you will find that the Rav
himself addressed it and explained it thus: We shall explain for you
one rule and that will explain and settle all the mentioned articles.
Know, that every Behinat middle line from the Chazeh down where
the Orot are uncovered, whether in ZA, in Nukva de Atzilut, in Beria,
or Yetzira, or Assiya, it is called Etz ha Daat.

--- PAGE 735 ---
Thus, when the Rav says here that Etz ha Daat is only in Assiya it
refers to the Assiya of every Partzuf and every degree of the degrees
and the Olamot. This is because from the Chazeh of every Olam and
every Partzuf downward, it is considered as Assiya or Malchut of that
Partzuf, even though they have five Sefirot TNHYM there.
However, not all the Assiya of the Partzuf is called Etz ha Daat, only
the Behinat middle line in it, which is Yesod. This is because the three
Kavim de Assiya are NHY and the middle line is Yesod. The Rav
describes more accurately in the Tree of Life that only Behinat Ateret
Yesod is called Etz ha Daat. This is why the Rav writes here that there
is only Etz ha Daat of good and bad in Assiya.
However, the Rav says (Tree of Life) that the sin of Adam ha Rishon
was in the lower Gan Eden, which is Bina de Malchut de Assiya. The
Karka of that Gan Eden does not touch this Eretz of ours, meaning the
Nekuda de Olam ha Zeh.
Thus, according to the Rav’s words here, Olam Assiya, which was
already entirely in the place of Nukva de Atzilut, was also the Karka of
the Gan Eden Tachton in Malchut of Olam Assiya that rose in the very
place of Karka de Atzilut itself. Hence, why does the Rav say there
that the Karka of the lower Gan Eden touched and did not touch our
Eretz when our Eretz was below in the Hitzoniut of the Olamot that
did not rise at all in all the ascents on the eve of Shabbat before the sin
(item 88)?
Moreover, only the Pnimiut of the three Olamot BYA rose before the
sin of Etz ha Daat, not all the Hitzoniut which is Behinat from Chazeh
de TNHY de AK downward that became the place of BYA (see item 3).
It turns out that the Karka of the Gan Eden Tachton stood at the Karka
of Olam Atzilut and our Eretz is below the Raglaim of AK with respect
to Behinat Malchut de Tzimtzum Aleph. The entire Hitzoniut de BYA
severs them and the distance between them is great, so how does he
say that Karka Gan Eden touched and did not touch our Eretz?
There is indeed great depth here and this is a very important matter.
First we must know that even before the sin of Adam ha Rishon the

--- PAGE 736 ---
Klipot came opposite Olam Atzilut, but they did not have Behinat
Panim be Panim, but were merely as Vav and Nekuda.
In general there are three Klipot: Ruach Se’arah, Anan Gadol, and Esh
Mitlakahat, which cling to Noga. This Noga is half good and half bad
because when Noga is attached to the Gevul of Parsa de Atzilut she is
good, and when the three above Klipot cleave to her, she becomes as
evil as they.
This is the meaning of the serpent being turned into a rod and the rod
turning into a serpent. The three above Klipot are the serpent. When
Noga clings to the Gevul of the Kedusha she is called “a rod” and she
is good, and when the Klipot cling to her the rod turns into a serpent
and it is bad.
Explanation: the Klipot are built from the deficits in Kedusha, as it is
written, “I shall be filled with her that is laid waste” since Tzor is only
built out of the ruin of Jerusalem. Thus the Shoresh became the Klipot
immediately with the deficit that was made at the outset of Tzimtzum
Aleph. This is because of the Tzimtzum that was made on Behina
Dalet to not receive the Ohr Elyon into her.
This is considered Malchut de Klipa and only Behinat Nekuda,
meaning merely Behinat Shoresh. However, after Tzimtzum Bet the
Hey Tata’a rose to Nikvey Eynaim when Malchut ha Mesayemet under
the place of Sium Raglin de AK rose to the place of Bina de Guf,
which is Chazeh de Tifferet.
Then the two bottom thirds of Tifferet and NHYM, which are Bina ZA
and Malchut de Guf became Behinat vacant and empty Halal without
Ohr (Part 16 item 3). Then these three above Klipot were made one
opposite the other, meaning opposite the three Kelim Bina ZA and
Malchut de Guf, which now remained as vacant Halal.
Ruach Se’arah is opposite Assiya, which is Malchut, Anan Gadol is
opposite Yetzira, which is ZA, and Esh Mitlakahat is opposite Beria,
which is Bina. Because this place of Halal in BYA caused a lessening
in Atzilut, which is the meaning of the amputee going out with his
stilt, there is the Behinat three above Klipot opposite from Olam

--- PAGE 737 ---
Atzilut too. However, prior to the sin of Adam ha Rishon the Klipot
were not built, and they were also separated from the Kedusha.
This matter of separation of the Klipot was made by the force of two
great Tikkunim that were corrected in Olam Atzilut: 1 – The Inner AVI
were concealed, which are GAR de Haya; 2 – Behina Dalet was
concealed in RADLA that the Mochin de Yechida come out on.
Explanation: The breaking of the vessels de ZAT de Nekudim
happened because of the He’arat AB that they received during the
Mochin de Haya that lowered the Hey Tata’a to the Peh as in
Tzimtzum Aleph. Then the strength of the Parsa was cancelled and the
ZAT de Nekudim expanded to the restricted place of BYA, and hence
broke, died and fell to the Klipot.
The two above Tikkunim were made in Olam Atzilut in order to correct
that, meaning in order to be able to receive Mochin de Gadlut by
He’arat AB that lowers the Hey Tata’a from the Eynaim to the Peh.
However, it is without expanding below Parsa to the restricted place
of BYA. 1 – The Hey Tata’a was concealed in RADLA, thus even when
He’arat AB lowers Hey Tata’a to the Peh there is no actual Behinat
Malchut there, only Yesod de Malchut; 2 – The Inner AVI were
concealed, which are the Behinat GAR de He’arat AB, and all that
remains is Behinat He’arat VAK de He’arat AB. This does not expand
from above downward at all, only illuminates from below upward,
meaning only from the Parsa upward.
Thus, you find that the force of Parsa is always kept so that it is not
cancelled as during the breaking of the vessels and no He’arah de
Atzilut will expand to the restricted place of BYA. Therefore, the Klipot
were separated from the Kedusha altogether because Kedusha no
longer expands below the Parsa and the Klipot can no longer rob the
Kedusha as during the breaking of the vessels.
Now you can understand what the Rav wrote above in item 56. In the
first Behina, meaning at the time of the birth of the Neshama of Adam
ha Rishon, although ZA rose to the Upper AVI and Mochin de Haya
illuminated, it did not help to make them able to raise all Eser Sefirot

--- PAGE 738 ---
de Olam Yetzira, only GAR de Yetzira, while the VAK remained below
Parsa.
This is so because there is no Behinat from above downward in
Mochin de Haya as the Inner AVI were concealed. For that reason it
suffices to raise only GAR de Yetzira, which are Behinat from below
upward and can rise to Atzilut. The VAK de Yetzira, however, did not
receive any Tikun from these Mochin since there is no Behinat from
above downward in that which expands to the VAK as well.
Now you can also understand what the Rav wrote in the ascents in the
second Behina on the eve of Shabbat after midnight, when ZA rose to
AA and acquired the Mochin de Yechida. Still, it only helped GAR de
Olam Assiya to be able to rise to Atzilut but ZAT de Assiya remained
below the Parsa and did not receive any Tikun (see below item 80).
This is so because of the concealment of the Hey Tata’a in RADLA,
and thus even in Mochin de Yechida that emerge by the lowering of
the Hey Tata’a to the Peh there is no actual Zivug on Behina Dalet,
only on Behinat Yesod de Malchut.
For that reason the Nukva de ZA cannot rise there and be mingled in
that Zivug since there is nothing of her Behina there. This is because
Yesod and Atara are Behinat Nukva of the Guf de ZA, which is good
for Behinat Zivug de ZA and Leah, being Behinat from Chazeh de ZA
upward and there is no Hitpashtut there from above downward to
Behinat Rachel.
It follows that only Behinat from the Chazeh upward of ZA rose to AA
and received Ohr Yechida, and from its Chazeh down which is Rachel,
Nukva de ZA, remained below in AVI. They did not receive anything
from the Mochin de Yechida. Hence in Assiya too, only her GAR that
could receive from the great Nukva, Leah, rose to Atzilut. However,
ZAT de Assiya did not receive anything from these Mochin and could
not ascend to Atzilut.
Moreover, even in the third Behina of the eve of Shabbat, at twilight,
when the bottom six of Assiya rose above Parsa to Atzilut, it was not a

--- PAGE 739 ---
complete ascent by Zivug on Behina Dalet, as this is utterly
impossible. After all, she is concealed in RADLA.
Rather the ascent was as “additions of Shabbat”, which is the great
dominion of Kedusha, as it is written that all the Dinim are
impregnated in her. Hence, this He’arah helped only for the day of
Shabbat and not before the Kodesh of the Shabbat.
The Rav wrote in the Tree of Life: “Adam ha Rishon could correct
only the Olamot Elyonim, but he did not correct Olam Assiya which is
all Klipot and this Olam remained in Behinat Achor be Achor etc. The
exterior have a hold there among those Achoraim between the
cleaved, and this is the meaning of ‘other gods’, meaning other gods
that cleave to the Achoraim.”
Explanation: It is explained that although ZA rose in AA by the
He’arat AB that lowers the Hey Tata’a to the Peh, there is still no
actual Hey Tata’a there. This is because she was concealed. Rather,
she is Malchut de Ima, contained in Yesod de Malchut.
This is enough for it only with Mochin de Ima of the Ohr Yechida,
since there is NRNHY in the Ohr Yechida and then ZA received only
the Neshama of Yechida. For that reason only ZA and Leah rise to AA
and Rachel remains below.
It is known that Mochin de Neshama suffice only to being GAR to the
Behinat from the Chazeh up, but from the Chazeh down he remains
Achor be Achor with Rachel, as it is written, “their hinder parts were
inward and their faces outward.” It means that there is only He’arah
for Kelim de Panim there, called HBD HGT, but the Kelim de
Achoraim which are NHY are hidden there inside the HGT.
This is so because they need to hide from the exterior that seize them
because all that the exterior want is to annul the ending force of Parsa
as during the breaking of the vessels. Thus they could receive He’arat
Atzilut once more as during the breaking of the vessels.
For that reason their hold is on these NHY of Assiya that need the
He’arah from above downward, whose Tikun is only by the

--- PAGE 740 ---
annulment of the Parsa. At that time He’arat Atzilut will expand once
more to the place of the Klipot as during the breaking of the vessels.
It turns out that as long as NHY de Assiya are concealed in the form of
“their hinder parts were inward” and do not awaken to receive their
Shefa, the Klipot are separated from the Kedusha. This is because they
cannot suck from the Kelim de Panim de Assiya since they only
receive from below upward and the Gevul of the Parsa is well kept to
not expand there to the restricted place of BYA where the Klipot
receive it.
However, when the Kelim de Achoraim awaken to suck from the
He’arat GAR it cancels the Gevul in the Parsa. This is so because they
can only receive from the Behinat GAR that comes from above
downward and cancels the Parsa as in the case of the breaking of the
vessels.
This is why the Klipot are called “other gods”. The Rav explained that
it is because they cleave to the Achoraim. In other words, if the
Achoraim de Assiya, which are the above NHY, would extend Shefa
GAR from above downward the Shefa will instantly reach the Klipot
since they are their actual Behina, meaning Behinat Lev ha Even.
The Rav writes that Olam Assiya is all Klipot (item 144) because in
fact they hold to the Achoraim de Yetzira too. Even Olam Yetzira
which is corrected in Mochin de Haya cannot receive them but only in
its GAR, meaning from below upward because of the above reason
that the Inner AVI were concealed. For that reason they have a hold
also from Chazeh de Yetzira downward.
However, this is only half of Yetzira, not all of it. Conversely, in Olam
Assiya where the entire Behina Dalet was concealed in RADLA, which
is the gist of Olam Assiya, all of it is considered Klipot. This is
because all that she extends from her share downward comes in the
Klipot, which are the remains of the Melachim in the form of Lev ha
Even.
This was the sin of Adam ha Rishon. He extended GAR de Haya that
shine inside the Achoraim de Assiya and Yetzira, meaning that pass the

--- PAGE 741 ---
Gevul of the Parsa as in the case of the breaking of the vessels. By so
doing he too caused the breaking of the vessels because all his organs
fell inside the Klipot. He also caused the Olamot to descend, and the
bottom four of Yetzira and all Eser Sefirot de Assiya were greatly
blemished since they were clothed in Mador ha Klipot (see item 94).
It is written, “Adam ha Rishon could correct only the Olamot Elyonim.
However, he did not correct Olam Assiya which is purely Klipot, and
this Olam remained in Behinat Achor be Achor. There, in those
Achoraim, since there are many Klipot there the waste is more than
the food and there is hold for the exterior among these Achoraim
among the cleaved. This is the meaning of ‘other gods’.”
This means that Kelim de Achoraim de Olam Assiya are only corrected
by manifestation of GAR de Haya and the manifestation of Malchut de
Behina Dalet concealed in RADLA. She extends the Mochin from
above downward and cancels the Gevul of the Parsa de Tzimtzum Bet.
Since this manifestation does not happen in the six thousand years
before the end of correction, it follows that there is no correction and
sorting to those Achoraim de Assiya. This is because they are Behinat
Lev ha Even, whose only desire is for that Shefa, since this is their
share. Their entire sustenance and vitalizing force is out of that desire.
The bottom six of Assiya rose to Atzilut in the third Behina of the eve
of Shabbat at twilight and the Yetzira and Assiya became Panim be
Panim (item 87). However, this was only because of the addition of
Shabbat, which is the authority of Kedusha of the day of Shabbat
itself, as it is said “All the judgments are impregnated in her.”
However, it was not because of the raising of MAN and the sorts since
there is no sorting for them throughout the six thousand years. Hence,
although the Achoraim de Assiya appeared there and became Panim
be Panim, with regard to the weekdays they are still considered Achor
be Achor.
The addition of Shabbat dominates only on the day of the Shabbat,
meaning after the Shabbat is sanctified. This is the meaning of the
words of the sages, that if he had waited with his Zivug to the day of

--- PAGE 742 ---
Shabbat, there would have been no hold to the exteriors. His whole sin
was that he rushed in his Zivug while it was still weekday.
It is written in the Tree of Life that “the Karka of the Garden touches
and does not touch our Eretz.” Because of the ascent that was made in
the addition of Shabbat when the Karka of the Garden rose to Atzilut,
it certainly had no contact with our Eretz.
Indeed, before he sanctified the Shabbat she was still connected with
other gods that cleave there to the Achoraim, as with regard to
weekdays there weren’t any sorts. It follows that she touches our
Eretz, which is the restricted Behina Dalet who is forbidden to receive
any He’arat Atzilut.
In this manner she touches from the perspective of the weekdays and
does not touch from the perspective of the addition of Shabbat. The
sin of Adam ha Rishon in eating Etz ha Daat means that he extended
Mochin in the Zivug of Yetzira and Assiya Panim be Panim on a
weekday.
These Mochin cancel the Gevul of the Parsa and come in the Klipot.
This gives strength to the serpent, which consists of all three Klipot, to
enter the lower Gan Eden and touch the Ateret Yesod, called Etz ha
Daat.
This is the meaning of the tree shouting and saying, “Do not touch
me!” The Rav wrote in the Tree of Life that by this touching, all the
Upper Mochin that Adam acquired in these three Behinot of the eve of
Shabbat, called Zihara Ela’a (Upper Radiance), fell and clothed in a
Guf of Olam ha Zeh of the Klipot.
In Beit Shaar HaKavanot (Ohr Pashut item 19) it is explained in
implication. Thus we have thoroughly explained the matter of Etz ha
Daat which is only in Assiya and that it is all Klipot. From here you
will also understand that the matter of Etz ha Daat and the matter of
the breaking of the vessels are indeed the same matter, except this was
in the Olamot and that was in the Neshamot.

--- PAGE 743 ---
53. In this explanation we settle both verses. One says “And God
created man” and the other says, “Then the Lord God formed
man.” The Guf of Adam was made of Yetzira, hence the word
“created” and after Beria descended and clothed in Yetzira it is as
though he was created from Beria, hence the word “formed.”
Ohr Pnimi
53. The Guf of Adam was made of Yetzira, hence the word “created”
etc. after Beria descended and clothed in Yetzira it is as though he
was created from Beria.
As ZA is Behinat Yetzira de Atzilut, so Adam ha Rishon is discerned as
the bottom Yetzira de BYA, meaning from the aspect of Ohr de Tolada.
In this aspect he has no part in Bina which is Beria and is not fitting
for Behinat Neshama and Mochin.
Instead, because of the ascent of the Hey Tata’a to Nikvey Eynaim,
Bina herself expanded to Behinat ZON, called Yetzira and Assiya, or
ZAT de Bina, in the form of VAK without a Rosh. In consequence,
ZON were rooted in Bina.
Hence, although in principle ZA is VAK without a Rosh, when it rises
to MAN to Bina and returns the AVI Panim be Panim, in consequence
YESHSUT acquire their GAR, thus ZA also acquires Behinat Rosh. The
rule is that everything that the Tachton induces in the Elyon returns to
the Tachton in the same measure.
Consequently, Adam ha Tachton too can receive the Behinat Rosh
from the ZON because after the ZON rise to AVI they become like
them. Thus, although in the beginning of its creation, Adam is not
worthy of Behinat Rosh because he has no part in Beria, yet through
his ascent to MAN to ZON he causes them Behinat GAR from their
Chazeh down too.
Since except the ascent of Adam to MAN ZON did not have Behinat
GAR but only from the Chazeh up, he also acquires by himself that
measure that Adam caused to extend in Chazeh de ZON down and
attains Behinat GAR as they do. The discernment is that Adam, which

--- PAGE 744 ---
is Yetzira, rose to Beria because he received GAR from Behinat Beria
and equalized with her. You should also remember that BYA, Bina,
ZON and NRN de Adam ha Rishon are one matter both in Atzilut and
in the lower BYA.
During the birth of Adam ha Rishon the Olamot were already in the
form of Beria, as the Rav wrote that Yetzira and Assiya de Atzilut were
already in the place of Beria de Atzilut. This means that ZON de
Atzilut have already ascended to AVI de Atzilut hence the lower BYA
and NRN de Adam ha Rishon, which are their Tolada, were thus born
in Behinat Beria.
The Guf of Adam ha Rishon, which is Yetzira, came out in the place of
the top six de Beria, by which they had Rosh in Atzilut in the place of
ZON. The Rosh itself, called Bina or Beria, was in the place of ZA de
Atzilut, and the Garon, which is GAR de VAK or GAR de Yetzira, was
in the place of Nukva de Atzilut.
This is the meaning of, “Then the Lord God formed man etc.” This is
because there was a complete Yetzira in a complete Rosh from Atzilut
since HaVaYaH Elokim implies perfection since Yetzira acquired the
very same virtue of Beria.
However, after the sin when Beria descended once more to being
Yetzira, which means that the Mochin de GAR that ZA caused
YESHSUT departed, YESHSUT descended to VAK without a Rosh
which is Yetzira. Also, the Mochin from ZA departed and he returned
to Behinat VAK without a Rosh.
Hence, all this is considered that Beria descended to being Yetzira.
This is the meaning of “And God created man etc.” It is so because
Elokim designates Behinat Mochin de Katnut due to the Behinat Beria
that became VAK without a Rosh.
That settles a difficult question: Beria is more important than Yetzira.
Hence, why does it write in “formed” a full HaVaYaH Elokim, and in
“created” only the name Elokim? According to the words of the Rav
we can thoroughly understand that “formed” relates to the complete
Yetzira after she had been turned into actual Beria and acquired Rosh

--- PAGE 745 ---
from Atzilut. This is why the full name is used. “Created”, however,
relates to his Behina after the sin on Behinat VAK without a Rosh,
meaning on Beria that fell to being like Yetzira. This is why it only
writes the name Elokim, indicating Katnut.
Therefore we should not ask why it is written, “created” when it
should have written “formed”. The answer is that he did not return to
actual Behinat Yetzira, as then it would never have been suitable for
GAR.
Instead, he returned to BYA and is therefore still worthy of reforming
his actions so as to raise MAN anew to ZON and extend Mochin de
Gadlut in the same amount that he causes in the Elyonim. This is the
precision of “created”, designating that he still holds to Beria, though
to Katnut of Beria.
54. Now we will explain a matter which is discussed elaborately and
then we will explain the superficiality of the above-mentioned text.
First we will explain the matter of the order of the degrees of the
Olamot and how they stood in the beginning, before Adam was
created, and also how they descended from their degree after he
had sinned. Know, that the number of the Olamot itself did not
change and they are always four, Atzilut, Beria, Yetzira Assiya.
55. However, their order of degrees was thus since the entire place of
Eser Sefirot of the current Olam Assiya as well as the place of the
four bottom Sefirot of the current Yetzira were empty and vacant.
There in that place was Mador ha Klipot.
56. The bottom six of Assiya were in the place where now the first six
of Yetzira are and the first four of Assiya were in the place where
the last four of Beria are now. The last six of Yetzira where in the
place where the first six of Beria are now and the first four of
Yetzira were in the place where Nukva de ZA de Atzilut now is.
You already know that she only takes the place of the last four of
ZA, namely Netzah Hod Yesod Malchut in him. She stands opposite
them from behind, hence the name Dalet, since her place is only in
the four mentioned Sefirot.

--- PAGE 746 ---
Ohr Pnimi
56. The bottom six of Assiya were in the place where now the first six
of Yetzira.
Here we must remember what the Rav wrote above (item 20) that only
ZON are sorted in the Beten of Ima and nothing more, and Rosh de
Beria is sorted in Beten Nukva de ZA de Atzilut.
The rule is that every Partzuf is emanated in its adjacent Upper
degree. You can see that according to the current state of the Olamot,
ZA is in Behinat VAK and Nukva in Behinat Nekuda from the
perspective of the permanent state. From that state it is impossible that
the Rosh of Beria will come out from the Beten of Nukva de Atzilut.
This is so because when even for herself she is not a Partzuf, how can
she emanate a second Partzuf below her? The rule is that the Partzuf
cannot emanate a Partzuf Tachton below it before it grows to Behinat
Neshama in itself (see item 60).
The Rav elaborated here to explain the order of the emergence of BYA
from its beginning so as to teach us that the Olamot were not in the
same situation as ZA is now, in a state of VAK and Nukva in Behinat
Nekuda. Rather, ZA was then in Komat Abba which is Behinat Mochin
de Haya and Nukva was in Komat Ima which is Mochin de Neshama.
Then Beria could be sorted in the Beten of Nukva until she was
completed and could sort the Olam Yetzira, and also Yetzira sort Olam
Assiya.
With the above we can also understand the order of the state of the
three Olamot BYA that the Rav wrote here. It is known that when the
Tachton rises to its Elyon it becomes exactly like the degree of the
Elyon, as the Rav will write in item 60.
It follows, that Nukva that rose to Komat Ima becomes completely like
Ima and everything that is emanated from Ima is considered as the
degree of ZA. This is because only Behinot ZA are sorted in Ima’s
Beten (item 20). Thus, the Eser Sefirot de Beria must have been in the

--- PAGE 747 ---
place of ZA because when Nukva is in Behinat Ima then Beria, which
is emanated from it, is in the degree of ZA.
Also, since Olam Beria was then in the degree of ZA, the first four
Sefirot of Olam Yetzira that emanates from it are considered to be in
the degree of Nukva de ZA which clothes ZA from his Chazeh
downward. Since Beria is in the degree of ZA the Ne’etzal from ZA is
always his Behinat Nukva.
However, there are two degrees in the Nukva: Achor be Achor with the
ZA from the Chazeh down, and Panim be Panim with the ZA on an
equal Koma. The general state of the Olamot was still in Behinat
Achor be Achor before Adam ha Rishon was created, as it is known
that ZON themselves, when they rose to AVI. Consequently, they were
still in a state of Achor be Achor.
This is so because ZA rose to Abba, called Upper AVI and Nukva rose
only to Ima, called YESHSUT. It follows that Nukva clothes there only
from the Chazeh de ZA downward in the same manner as the
Halbasha of YESHSUT to the Upper AVI.
Thus, the Upper ZON are also only in Behinat from the Chazeh down
Achor be Achor. Thus, although Olam Yetzira received the Behinat
Nukva de ZA because of its exit from Beria which was Behinat ZA,
she only received the first degree of Nukva, meaning Behinat Chazeh
de ZA Achor be Achor downward.
For that reason only the first four of Yetzira became the degree of
Nukva de ZA, but the bottom six of Yetzira descended to the current
Behinat Beria, meaning below Parsa de Atzilut. This is because the
Behinat Nukva de ZA takes only four Sefirot while being Achor be
Achor from the Chazeh down and the rest of her Sefirot are in Beria.
Also, since Olam Yetzira became the degree of Nukva de ZA, it is
considered that Olam Assiya that comes out of it, the first four Sefirot
de Assiya became the degree of Olam Beria. This is because in Beten
de Nukva de ZA only Olam Beria is sorted.

--- PAGE 748 ---
However, Nukva herself had only the first four Sefirot in Atzilut and
the six lower Sefirot were in the degree of the first six of Olam Beria.
Hence only the first four Sefirot of Olam Assiya, which is sorted by
her, were in Olam Beria since they extend from the first four Sefirot
de Nukva.
Yet, her six bottom are considered to have been emanated from the
bottom six of Nukva that were on the degree of Beria, and everything
that comes from the degree of Beria is considered as the degree of
Yetzira. For this reason the bottom six of Olam Assiya descended to
the first six of Olam Yetzira.
Thus we have thoroughly explained the necessity of the state in the
Olamot and their degree, that they must be as in the order that the Rav
explains here. This is because no sorting is possible in the Beten of
Nukva before she acquires Partzuf Neshama.
It follows that she must clothe Ima and since the Nukva already stood
in the degree of Ima, then all the states that the Rav has already
written must be so. You will also learn here that all the Olamot BYA
came out of Nukva de Atzilut.
This is because not only did Olam Beria come out of Nukva that is in
the place of Ima, when Olam Assiya emerged from Yetzira, the Yetzira
was literally in the degree of Nukva de Atzilut. It follows that Olam
Assiya too came out of Nukva de Atzilut, but from the Behinat Achor
be Achor de Nukva.
57. All Eser Sefirot of Beria were in the place which is now ZA de
Atzilut in all its Eser Sefirot and his Nukva de Atzilut was then in
the current place of Abba ve Ima de Atzilut. The Olamot continue
similarly from Abba ve Ima de Atzilut upward to the highest
degree, to Ein Sof, higher than their current degree and we need
not elaborate here.
58. Indeed there is a question here. We have already learned that the
lowest degree in the entire Atzilut is higher than every thing below
it through the end of Assiya etc. similarly in all the degrees. This is

--- PAGE 749 ---
so because even the bottom degree in Beria is greater than every
thing below it, which are Yetzira and Assiya.
Thus, how did we say above that Olam Yetzira had only its Upper
four above where Nukva de Atzilut now stands and the rest of the
bottom six Sefirot de Yetzira remained below in the place that it is
now Beria? After all, all the Olamot could stand at the lowest
degree de Nukva de Atzilut, which is beneath it.
59. The answer to that is that when it is written in a different place
that the lowest degree in the higher Olam is greater than
everything below it, it does not relate to quantity and a
measurement of limited space. Rather, it is discerned in the
quality of the Ohr itself being better than everything below it. In
that aspect of quality and merit it contains everything that is
below it.
In comparison, we see that the last drop in a human being’s brain
contains everything that exists below it in the entire human body.
It is so although we see that it is not so with respect to the size of
the place. Moreover, a single organ of the body such as the thigh
of the leg is bigger than the size of the entire head.
Ohr Pnimi
59. Quantity and a measurement of limited space. Rather, it is
discerned in the quality of the Ohr itself.
This must not be confused with an imaginary place. Rather, quality
means the number of disparities in form in the degree without
differentiations of merit and importance in it. This is how he explains
that it is true that the smaller degree in the Elyon is greater than
everything below it.
Yet, this is still a qualitative difference, not a quantitative difference.
For example, Malchut in the Elyon is greater than all the Olamot and
Sefirot below it. Hence, it is impossible for the two Sefirot below her
to be in Malchut de Elyon. According to the quantity there is only one

--- PAGE 750 ---
form in Malchut de Elyon, which is why it is considered as merely one
Sefira.
For that reason she cannot accept within her two Sefirot that have two
different forms from one another, which necessarily require two
separate places. The reason is that the Sefira is the Behinat Ohr, and
the place is the Behinat Kli related to it.
Thus, the four Sefirot of Yetzira cannot be in the place of one Sefira of
Malchut de Atzilut, but it requires four Sefirot of Malchut de Atzilut.
This is because every Sefira requires its own unique place, as every
disparity of form in the Ohr necessitates a disparity of form in the
place, which is the Kli.
60. I also believe I had heard from my teacher a different answer
regarding this. It is that this is only meant to be when every single
degree is in its proper place because then the measure of the
lowest degree in the higher Olam is greater than everything below
it.
However, when Olam Beria rises to Olam Atzilut Beria returns to
being in the degree of Atzilut itself and requires the same amount
of space as if it is Atzilut in itself, etc. similarly.
Hence, when Yetzira rises to Nukva de Atzilut’s place she returns to
being in her merit. Then the first four Sefirot of Yetzira require the
same measure of space as the Nekeva of Atzilut, whose measure is
also four Sefirot de Atzilut.
Ohr Pnimi
60. When Olam Beria rises to Olam Atzilut Beria returns to being in
the degree of Atzilut.
This is very simple. There is no issue of imaginary places here, but of
quality of merit. When you say that the Tachton rises to the place of
the Elyon it means that its Tzura has been equalized with the Elyon.
Hence, it is necessary that when Beria rises to the place of Atzilut it
becomes exactly like Atzilut, and remember that in all the places.

--- PAGE 751 ---
61. Let us return to the first matter. Before Adam was created the
Sium of Assiya was at the end of the sixth Sefira of the current
Olam Yetzira and the bottom four de Yetzira were all vacant, and
all the Eser Sefirot of the current Assiya too. Together they are
fourteen Sefirot and there was the section of all the Klipot.
62. That place of the fourteen Sefirot was then the zone of the Olamot,
such as we place in every town a Shabbat Zone around it. This is
the meaning of the words of our sages why He is called El Shadai,
since He said to His world Dai (Heb: enough).
Interpretation: As these four Olamot ABYA expanded when they
reached the place of Sium of the sixth Sefira of the current Yetzira,
He said to them “Dai, do not expand and do not enter the zone of
the above-mentioned fourteen.” Instead, they would remain a
Halal for the Klipot as was mentioned.
Ohr Pnimi
62. That place of the fourteen Sefirot was then the zone of the Olamot,
etc. Shabbat Zone around it.
This implies to the Shabbat Zone of two thousand Amah that is given
and added to the territory of the town where it is permitted to go out of
town.
The thing is that Shabbat means the dominion of Atzilut in all the
Olamot because the three Olamot BYA rise to Atzilut there as the Rav
writes below. This is the meaning of the verse, “let no man go out of
his place on the seventh day.”
The city one dwells in on Shabbat implies the place of Olam Atzilut
where the Olamot rose. Hence he is forbidden to go out of his city on
the day of the Shabbat, as the Olamot do not go out of Atzilut on the
day of the Shabbat.
Yet, our sages added another two thousand Amah around the city
where it is permitted to go out of the city without breaking “let no man
go out of his place on the seventh day.” This requires explanation why
it is not considered an exit outside his place.

--- PAGE 752 ---
We must understand these words, since on Shabbat all the Olamot rise
to Atzilut and the same sixteen Sefirot through the current Chazeh de
Yetzira also remain empty of the Ohr of Kedusha. Thus, the Shabbat
Zone was made above in the place of Parsa between Atzilut and
Beria, meaning the place where Atzilut ended. Why then is it
permitted in exit and is not considered exit outside the zone until the
place of Chazeh de Yetzira?
To understand that we must remember everything that the Rav wrote
above in this Part in items One through Eight and in Ohr Pnimi there,
meaning the explanation of the place of BYA. All of these thirty Sefirot
de BYA, the sixteen and the fourteen that the Rav deals with here relate
primarily to the thirty Sefirot of the place of BYA. They are called the
Hitzoniut of the three Olamot BYA which do not rise even on the day
of Shabbat, as the Rav writes below.
He says about them that at the end of the sixteenth Sefira it is the
Shabbat Zone and is prohibited to enter in the zone of the fourteen
Sefirot below. It explains there that this place BYA was made of half of
Partzuf Tifferet and NHY de AK that remained under the Parsa de
Atzilut during Tzimtzum Bet.
This was because of the ascent of Malchut ha Mizdaveget to Nikvey
Eynaim and Malchut ha Mesayemet rose to the place of the half of
Tifferet, which is Bina de Guf. There the place of Sium Kav Ein Sof
was made which is Parsa de Atzilut, and from there down there
remained an empty and vacant space without Ohr.
Hence, half Tifferet and NHY de AK remained empty without Ohr and
are called the place of the three Olamot BYA, meaning where the three
Olamot BYA are destined to expand.
See in Ohr Pnimi, the rest of the text, that the place for Olam Beria
was made of the bottom half of Tifferet, the place for Olam Yetzira
was made of NHY and the place for Olam Assiya was made of
Malchut.
We know what the Rav writes for us that you have not a tiny Nitzotz in
all four Olamot ABYA that has not four Behinot ABYA in itself. Thus,

--- PAGE 753 ---
even within those TNHY de Partzuf Nekudot de SAG de AK that
remained under the Parsa de Atzilut to the place of BYA, they are also
considered as four Behinot ABYA in themselves.
This is so because those TNHYM expand to Eser Sefirot HBD HGT
NHYM where HBD is the Rosh, HGT is the Behinat Atzilut in it until
the Chazeh, and from Chazeh to Sium de Tifferet it is Beria in it. NHY
are Yetzira and Malchut is the Assiya in it.
Thus the principal dominion force of BYA in it appears only from the
Chazeh down, meaning from the Sium of the sixth Sefira of Yetzira
downward. However, from the Chazeh up it is still Behinat Atzilut
compared to the Kelim, even though it is empty of Ohr Elyon because
of the Parsa de Atzilut above it that has already ended the Kav Ein Sof
there.
Now we have thoroughly explained the great difference between the
sixteen Sefirot from the Chazeh up in BYA’s place and the fourteen
Sefirot from the Chazeh down in it, even when it is completely empty
of Ohr, meaning immediately after Tzimtzum Bet. Even then it is
considered that Behinat BYA is not apparent in the Kelim until the
Chazeh since they are Behinat Rosh and Atzilut in the Kelim. The
force of BYA is only apparent in them from the Chazeh down.
Now we can thoroughly understand the matter the Shabbat Zone of
the two thousand Amah, permitted in exit although they are outside the
city. The Rav says that they are opposite these sixteen Sefirot from
Chazeh de BYA upward. From the Behinat Ohr in them they are
already BYA since they are below Parsa de Atzilut. Therefore they are
considered to be outside the city.
Yet, since from the Behina of the Kelim they are still Atzilut until the
sixth Sefira of Yetzira, it is therefore still permitted to go there since it
is not considered an exit outside Atzilut.
The reason is that they are still considered Atzilut from the perspective
of the Kelim, hence the prohibition of “let no man go out of his place”
does not apply to them. It is so because from the perspective of the
Kelim they are still Atzilut.

--- PAGE 754 ---
The matter of the number of two thousand years implies the two
Sefirot Keter and Hochma in them because HBD is Rosh and Keter
and HGT are Atzilut and Hochma since the five Sefirot KHB ZON are
called Rosh and ABYA. We find that until Chazeh de Yetzira they are
only two Sefirot Keter and Hochma and from the Chazeh down they
are Bina and ZON.
This is why the Rav writes that they are called Shabbat Zone, since
Shabbat is Behinat Atzilut and at the Sium of the sixth Sefira de Yetzira
it is the zone of Atzilut. From there down begins the BYA in them,
being the fourteen bottom Sefirot.
You will not be perplexed by what the Rav wrote above that Rosh is
Beria and HGT through Chazeh is Yetzira and from the Chazeh down
it is Assiya. The value of the Orot is on one side and the value of the
Kelim is on another.
What the Rav wrote to us in several places, that there is not a tiny
Nitzotz in the entire ABYA that does not have Behinat ABYA within it,
these are the values of the Kelim. Even the corporeal Guf is considered
to have Keter and ABYA. Its Rosh is Behinat Keter, from Peh to
Chazeh it is Atzilut, from Chazeh to Tabur it is Beria, and from Tabur
down it is Yetzira and Assiya.
Although compared to the Orot there isn’t even Ohr Malchut in it
before it acquires the Eser Sefirot de Assiya called Cycles, yet, even a
fetus in its mother’s womb already has these Eser Sefirot. No Kli will
be added to it when it grows, but it is merely that the Kelim are not
fitting for their task before they acquire the Orot ascribed to them.
Because of that, we mostly name the Kelim after the Orot dressed in
them. The Rav writes above regarding the Guf of Adam ha Rishon that
his Rosh is Beria, meaning Neshama and HBD, his Guf which is HGT
is Yetzira, meaning Ruach, and from the Chazeh down he is Assiya,
meaning Ohr Nefesh.
This discernment is according to the values of the Orot clothed in him.
In addition, in that regard it is considered that the Rosh and the HGT
through the Chazeh are considered the First nine Sefirot in the Guf,

--- PAGE 755 ---
which are Keter and ABY and from the Chazeh down it is only for
Sefirat Malchut in him, called Assiya.
This is so from the Behinat Hitlabshut Orot in the Kelim since every
emergence of an act in the Kelim is only according to the Orot clothed
in them.
When we are concerned with discerning only the values of the Kelim,
such as here concerning the Shabbat Zone where the prohibition
applies chiefly to the places that are the Kelim, we have to discern ten
complete Sefirot in them KHB ZON. These are called Rosh and ABYA
each emerging from its opposite Behina in the Shorashim Elyonim
until “one higher than the high” by way of branch and root. Hence this
also applies to a corporeal Guf.
It is written, “When they reached the place of Sium of the sixth
Sefira of the current Yetzira, He said to them “Dai, do not expand
and do not enter the zone of the above-mentioned fourteen.”
Instead, they would remain a Halal for the Klipot.”
It has been explained (Ohr Pnimi item 56) at the end of the item, that
all these three Olamot BYA were emanated from Nukva de Atzilut and
even Olam Assiya emerged from Nukva de Atzilut. This is because her
Elyon which is Olam Yetzira was then in Behinat actual Nukva de
Atzilut.
Thus, even Olam Assiya can only expand through the Sium of the
current Chazeh de Yetzira, meaning only in the measure of the sixteen
Sefirot which are Behinat Atzilut de BYA. However, they could not
expand from the Chazeh down, where they are already Behinat BYA
from the perspective of the Kelim too. This is because the force of
Sium de Kav Ein Sof made in the Parsa below Atzilut begins to show
its authority there in Chazeh de Yetzira meaning after the Sium of the
Rosh and Atzilut de BYA.
For that reason no upshots of Nukva de Atzilut can expand there since
the dominance of the Sium de Kav Ein Sof made in Tzimtzum Bet
leave these fourteen Sefirot as vacant Halal. It is written, “they would
remain a Halal for the Klipot.”

--- PAGE 756 ---
As Olam ha Zeh was made in Behinat vacant Halal in Tzimtzum
Aleph, so from Chazeh de Yetzira down it became a vacant Halal in
Tzimtzum Bet because the force of Sium de Parsa below the Atzilut
begins to manifest there.
You can relate the matter to what is written in AA de Atzilut that this
Masach in Peh de AA that generates Bina de AA outside the Rosh does
not appear at all in its exit place at the Peh, but only in the place of its
Chazeh. Hence, AVI that stand from the Peh to the Chazeh still have
Rosh and GAR. Only YESHSUT, which stand from his Chazeh down
remain in Behinat VAK without a Rosh because of this Masach.
We have elaborated in different places, but here too the power of Sium
in the Parsa below Atzilut is Behinat Peh de Rosh with regard to BYA,
hence beginning only at Chazeh de BYA. From there down the vacant
Halal is made for the Klipot.
63. Now we shall explain the matter of Adam ha Rishon, how he
expanded in these Olamot. I have already notified you in the
article Studied in the House of Eliyahu, section The World Exists
Six Thousand Years, in Parashat Bereshit, regarding the sin of
Adam ha Rishon, that Adam ha Rishon contained three Olamot,
which are Beria Yetzira and Assiya.
64. This is the order of his Hitpashtut in them: The Rosh of Adam ha
Rishon was in Olam Beria, which is now the place of ZA de Atzilut
and his Garon was in the first four of Yetzira, which is now the
place of Nukva de Atzilut. You already know that Nukva de Atzilut
is called Gan Eden, thus only his Garon was placed in Gan Eden.
65. From there downward his entire Guf was outside Gan Eden in a
manner that his whole Guf was place in the last six of Yetzira and
in the first four of Assiya. These are now the measure of place of
the entire Olam Beria.
66. However, the Guf of Adam was divided into two divisions, because
Yesod de Bina expands until the Chazeh and the Orot inside it are
covered. From the Chazeh down the Orot are uncovered, as we
explain regarding the Hassadim that expand in Tifferet de ZA.

--- PAGE 757 ---
For that reason his Guf was divided into two Olamot, the covered
Upper half was placed in the last six of Yetzira and the revealed
lower half was placed in the first four de Assiya.
67. It turns out that his Guf was primarily above in Yetzira, as it is
known that the Guf implies the Vav of HaVaYaH and Yetzira is also
implied in the Ot Vav itself. The Raglaim of Adam ha Rishon were
placed at the bottom four of the past Assiya which are now the
first six of Yetzira. Thus we have explained the Hitpashtut of Adam
ha Rishon in three Olamot Beria Yetzira Assiya when he was
created.
68. Now we will explain the matter of Adam ha Rishon when he was
created, as our sages wrote in the Midrash and the Talmud, how
we connect it to what we have explained. Our sages said that the
Guf of Adam ha Rishon was created from Eretz Israel, his Agavot
(buttocks) from Bavel and from Akra DeAgma (a city in Babylon).
To explain that we must also explain what they said in the
Tikkunim that Yetzira controlled Eretz Israel and Assiya controlled
Hutz la Eretz, Ever ha Yarden, Suria etc. What all these
discernments mean. We have explained that before Adam was
created the Olamot were higher in degree.
Ohr Pnimi
68. Hitpashtut of Adam ha Rishon in three Olamot Beria Yetzira Assiya
when he was created.
This entire article was explained above in Part 8 and study it there.
69. We have also explained that his Guf was from Eretz Israel. You
already know that only Yetzira controls Eretz Israel, not Assiya.
Yet, at that time the last six of Yetzira were in the place where the
first six of Beria are now.
70. The Guf of Adam was of the last six of the past Yetzira, because the
Guf means the Ot Vav, and Yetzira is also Ot Vav. Thus, Yetzira
controls Eretz Israel and you find that the Guf of Adam was from
Eretz Israel which is from Yetzira, which is between two Olamot

--- PAGE 758 ---
Beria and Assiya. Also, the Guf of Adam is the middle of the whole
of Adam.
71. However, the last Sefira of the six Sefirot of Yetzira is called
Malchut de Yetzira, Nukva de ZA de Yetzira which is now the sixth
Sefira of Olam Beria. This is the meaning of Ever ha Yarden, the
place of the children of Gad and the children of Reuben. It is
considered Malchut of the past Yetzira with all first three of the
past Assiya, which are now the four bottom Sefirot de Beria.
72. All these four bottom Sefirot of the current Beria are the meaning
of Ever ha Yarden, and they are Tifferet and Netzah and Hod and
Yesod of the current Beria. However, Malchut of the current Beria
that was then the fourth Sefira de Assiya is called Suria and her
degree is worse than Ever ha Yarden.
73. It turns out that the past Malchut de Yetzira was the past Ever ha
Yarden and the current Malchut de Beria was Behinat Suria. The
last six of the past Assiya, which are the first six of the current
Yetzira, were Hutz la Eretz since these were then Behinat Assiya. It
is known that Assiya hangs in Hutz la Eretz and controls there, and
we have already explained that the Raglaim of Adam ha Rishon
were from Hutz la Eretz.
74. It is known that each Regel (leg) is divided into three Prakin. The
two upper Prakin in both Raglaim, called his Agavot, were from
Bavel and from Akra DeAgma, as mentioned in the Gmarah.
75. Do not be surprised by that because they are very close to Eretz
Israel, as it is written in the Midrash and the Yerushalmi about
that man who was plowing with his cow. It ran away from him
and he chased it until they reached Bavel before night.
Thus, the Guf from Eretz Israel is not far from his Agavot from
Bavel, since these are the two upper Prakin proximate to the Guf.
The other lower four Prakin in both his Raglaim were from the
other lands in Hutz la Eretz.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 759 ---
75. The Guf from Eretz Israel is not far from his Agavot from Bavel,
since these are the two upper Prakin proximate to the Guf.
Eretz Israel is Behinat Olam Yetzira. Prior to the sin her First four
were in Nukva de Atzilut and her lower six were in the First six of
Beria, meaning HBD HGT through Chazeh de Beria.
Our sages do not speak of the Rosh and Garon of Adam ha Rishon, but
only from his Guf which is Behinat lower six de Yetzira that were then
in the First six of Beria. Also, Malchut de Yetzira that stands in the
place of Chazeh de Beria is Behinat Ever ha Yarden, containing the
First four of Assiya too, which then clothed the lower four TNHY de
Beria. The Behinat Guf de Adam ha Rishon was made of them, from
the Chazeh down to the end of his Tifferet.
Malchut of the First four of Assiya that was in the place of the current
Beria is Behinat Suria, close to Bavel. The Raglaim of Adam ha
Rishon are Behinat bottom six of Assiya that clothe the First six of
Yetzira until the Chazeh. This place is Behinat Hutz la Eretz, hence
you find that his Raglaim are from Behinat Hutz la Eretz.
However, the Raglaim are divided into three thirds. His two Upper
thirds, called his Agavot, are from Behinat two Upper thirds de VAK
de Assiya, which are Behinat Bavel, proximate to Suria, which is
Malchut of the First four of Assiya.
The part of his Guf from the Chazeh down to Sium Tifferet is made of
those. The two Upper thirds of VAK de Yetzira, namely Bavel, are
found to be close to Behinat Eretz Israel, meaning Malchut de Yetzira
that was in Chazeh de Beria like his Agavot, close to his Guf.
76. Now we have explained how Adam ha Rishon took from the entire
Olam ha Zeh and his Guf was stretched over three Olamot Beria
Yetzira Assiya too, and all is one. Thus we have explained the first
Behina, how the Olamot were when Adam ha Rishon was created.
We also explained how his Rosh and Garon were inside GE and his
Guf in the rest of the Olam.
Ohr Pnimi

--- PAGE 760 ---
76. The first Behina, how the Olamot were when Adam ha Rishon was
created.
We must know that this first Behina is considered the “constant” of
Mochin de BYA, but they descended from their place because of the
sin of Etz ha Daat.
77. Now we will explain the second Behina after Adam ha Rishon was
created and the Creator placed him in Gan Eden. It was then half
of the sixth day and onward, at which time Kedusha is necessarily
added in all the Olamot, as we explain regarding the eve of
Shabbat.
The Olamot begin to rise above their place from the fifth hour of
the eve of Shabbat and Kedusha is added to them. It is as we
mention regarding the excess Hey mentioned in verse, “And there
was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.” It implies the
fifth hour.
Ohr Pnimi
77. The Olamot begin to rise above their place from the fifth hour of
the eve of Shabbat etc. It is as we mention regarding the excess
Hey.
Explanation: The six days of Bereshit are HGT NHY. Thus, the sixth
day is Yesod, in which all five days were sweetened and corrected,
which are HGT NH. This is the meaning of the Sixth Day “And the
heaven and the earth were finished etc.” For this reason Yesod is called
Kol (Heb: all), because it contains five Sefirot HGT NH.
The sixth day itself is divided into twelve hours. The first six are five
Hassadim in Yesod, which are the sweetening of the five days HGT
NH from the aspect of the Hassadim. You find that the sixth hour is its
own Behina from the aspect of Hassadim.
The last six hours are the sweetening of the five days HGT NH from
the aspect of the Gevurot in them, and the sixth hour and the twilight
is its own Behina from the aspect of the Gevurot, sweetening the five
Gevurot HGT NH.

--- PAGE 761 ---
The sweetening falls mainly on the fifth day, which is Hod, namely
Malchut that is close to the Klipot. This is the reason for the excess
Hey of the sixth day, implying the fifth hour, which is the Hesed that is
ascribed to Sefirat Hod.
Thus, when the fifth hour on the eve of Shabbat comes, the Olamot
begin to rise up from their place and Kedusha is added to them. This is
so because then all five days HGT NH have been sweetened from the
aspect of the five Hassadim in the Yesod, and hence there is an ascent
to all the Olamot above their place.
78. Thus we shall now explain what was renewed that eve of Shabbat
after midnight when Adam was created and entered Gan Eden
with all his Guf. When he was created only his Rosh and Garon
were in Gan Eden, and the rest of his Guf was in Olam ha Zeh.
Now, however, he entered Gan Eden entirely.
79. The Olamot rose in the following manner: ZA rose to the place
that is now the place of AA. Nukva rose to the place that is now the
place of Abba, and Beria rose to the place that is now the place of
Ima. Also, Yetzira in the place of ZA and Assiya in the place of
Malchut Nukva de ZA.
Ohr Pnimi
79. The Olamot rose in the following manner: ZA rose to the place
that is now the place of AA.
ZA de Atzilut first came out only in Behinat VAK without GAR,
considered its “permanence”, and the GAR that he later acquired is
considered “inconsistent additions”. Similarly, BYA came out in the
first Behina in the Behinat VAK in them, because Beria came out in
the place of ZA de Atzilut, which is Behinat VAK.
Also, Yetzira came out in the place of Nukva de ZA, clothing from the
Chazeh down, when the Nukva has only Behinat VAK without GAR.
This is considered the “permanent” of BYA, had it not been for the sin
that lowered them below Parsa.

--- PAGE 762 ---
Now at the fifth hour on the eve of Shabbat Kedusha was added to
them (see Ohr Pnimi item 77). BYA acquired Mochin of Behinat
addition, meaning the GAR in them, because ZA rose to the place of
AA and Nukva to the place of Abba, meaning Upper AVI, where Nukva
procreated the Mochin for Olam Beria.
Mochin de Beria were emanated from the Upper AVI since Nukva rose
there, and everything that emanated from the Upper AVI is considered
YESHSUT. Hence, Olam Beria was then made in the degree of
YESHSUT de Atzilut and acquired her GAR.
Similarly, Beria emanated Mochin for Olam Yetzira and through these
Mochin the Yetzira became the degree of ZA de Atzilut. This is because
everything that emerges and emanates from the degree of YESHSUT is
considered the degree of ZA. Then Yetzira too acquired her Mochin de
GAR.
Similarly, Yetzira emanated Mochin to Olam Assiya. Because Yetzira
is now in the degree of ZA, the Mochin de Assiya were made in the
degree of Nukva de Atzilut clothing ZA from his Chazeh downward,
Achor be Achor, since she is the next degree after ZA.
You find that now the Assiya is in the state of Olam Yetzira in the first
Behina, where GAR de Assiya clothe the Nukva de Atzilut and her
bottom six remain under the Parsa clothing the First six of the current
Olam Beria.
This is so because Nukva de Atzilut herself in the place she rose, also
clothes ZA only from the Chazeh down since ZA rose to the place of
AA and Nukva did not rise there with him. Instead, she remained in
AVI, clothing ZA from the Chazeh down as has been explained above
in the first Behina in the bottom six of Yetzira.
80. The first four of Assiya rose because this is the measure of Nukva
de ZA, only four Sefirot. The other six Sefirot de Assiya are in the
place of the first six of the current Beria. Yet, AVI de Atzilut and
everything above them also rose above their degree in this order,
and we should not elaborate in them.

--- PAGE 763 ---
81. Know, that the principal place of the Olamot and their genuine
degree is in this order, and this is their rightful place for all times.
The reason is that ZA should grow to be like Arich Anpin and
should therefore rise up to there. Also, the place of Arich Anpin
should be the place of ZA because by that it becomes Arich.
Ohr Pnimi
81. The principal place of the Olamot and their genuine degree is in
this order, and this is their rightful place for all times etc. ZA
should grow to be like Arich Anpin.
It means that the whole matter of Olam ha Tikun is about reviving the
seven Melachim that died during the breaking of the vessels in Olam
Nekudim. This will mean the revival of the dead and Gmar ha Tikun.
However in the beginning of Olam ha Tikun, when the new MA came
out and revived the Melachim, not all were corrected, but some were
corrected and some were not corrected. Consequently, all the degrees
descended from their place.
GAR de Atik clothed on the place of GAR de Nekudim and HGT
NHYM de Atik on the place of HGT NHYM de Nekudim. GAR de AA
clothed on HGT de Atik, meaning on the place of HGT de Nekudim,
and AVI and ZON on ZAT de AA in the place of TNHYM de Nekudim.
It turns out that AA descended to the place of ZA de Nekudim, because
his GAR clothe HGT de Atik that stand in the place of HGT de
Nekudim, which are ZA. ZA himself descended to Behinat VAK de
NHY de Nekudim since AVI clothe HGT de AA, which in turn clothe
NHY de Atik that stand in the place of TNHYM de Nekudim.
ZA clothes VAK de VAK de AA and is therefore located in the place of
VAK de VAK de NHY de Nekudim. It follows that the degrees
descended significantly since AA descended to the degree of ZA de
Nekudim and ZA descended to VAK de VAK de NHY de Nekudim.
It is written, “ZA should grow to be like Arich Anpin etc. the place
of Arich Anpin should be the place of ZA because by that it
becomes Arich.” It means that AA stands in the place of ZA of Olam

--- PAGE 764 ---
ha Nekudim, meaning the place of HGT de Atik that took the place of
HGT de Nekudim, which are ZA.
Before ZA rises and clothes his HGT in Olam ha Nekudim, all the
degrees are still in a state of descent. It is written, “Know, that the
principal place of the Olamot and their genuine degree is in this
order,” meaning that ZA will rise and take the place of GAR de AA,
which is the true place of ZA.
Also, Nukva’s place was in Nekudim in the place of NHY de Nekudim,
meaning from the Chazeh of ZA de Nekudim downward. Now during
the descent of the degrees the GAR of the Upper AVI stand there
clothing HGT de AA which clothe NHY de Atik, which are the place of
NHY de Nekudim.
Similarly, the real place of the three Olamot BYA is in the place of
YESHSUT and ZON de Olam Atzilut. This is because these three
Olamot BYA are discerned as the new NHY that came out to ZA during
the emergence of Gadlut de ZAT de Nekudim with the Mochin de AB
SAG that came out. This is because the Mochin de AB lowered the Hey
Tata’a from the Eynaim and raised the AHP that fell to the Guf back to
the Eser Sefirot de Rosh.
Also, as a result, the TNHY that fell below Parsa to the place of BYA
returned, joined the ZAT de Nekudim and became Behinat Atzilut.
However, they broke because the Parsa was not yet in its fullest
power. In consequence, the Ohr expanded to these new NHY de BYA
from above downward, meaning to the place of BYA. As a result, they
broke and died since they breached the Gevul of the Parsa.
However, if the Orot of the new NHY had not expanded into BYA but
would rather have raised the new NHY from BYA above Parsa, as in
the case of Olam ha Tikun, then they would not have been broken.
They would have remained with all the Orot de Atzilut forever.
Now you can see that the whole issue of the sorting of BYA is these
new NHY that joined the ZAT de Nekudim when they were already in
Gadlut. They broke because they wanted to receive the Orot de Atzilut

--- PAGE 765 ---
in their place in BYA, and must now sort them and raise them from the
place of BYA to be once more Behinat new NHYM to Olam Atzilut.
This will be the Tikun and the revival of the dead. You find that the
true place of BYA is in the place of YESHSUT and ZON de Atzilut
because after ZA and Nukva return to their place in Nekudim, these
BYA must be their Behinat new NHY, clothing Nukva from the Chazeh
down.
Since Nukva is the place of AVI then her new NHY, which are BYA are
from the Chazeh down of the Nukva in the place of YESHSUT and
ZON. This is because YESHSUT and ZON are clothed from the
Chazeh down of AVI, and thus the real place of the three Olamot BYA
at the time of Gmar Tikun is in the place of YESHSUT and ZON de
Atzilut.
This thoroughly explains the words of the Rav how this order that was
on the second Behina on the eve of Shabbat is the true state of ZON
and BYA.
82. Nukva of ZA in the place of Abba, as it is written, “by wisdom
founded the earth,” as “Father founded his daughter.” It is also
the meaning of “Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore, for it is holy.”
“Keep,” which is the Nukva becomes “holy,” which is Abba.
This is the meaning of the text “it is holy,” because the Nekeva
returns to being holy, and Beria rose in Ima, as you know that Ima
nests in her abdomen.” Also, Yetzira in the place of ZA because ZA
nests in the angel and Assiya in Nukva de ZA because Malchut
nests in the Ofan, which is Assiya.
83. You find that this is the worthy place for the order of the degrees
of the Olamot, and you now find that all the lower Olamot of Beria
Yetzira and Assiya were in the place of Atzilut except the last six of
Yetzira. Those were then at the First six of the current Beria.
84. This was the meaning of the Ibur of the Ir (town) mentioned in the
Talmud. It is because these bottom six protrude and exit Olam

--- PAGE 766 ---
Atzilut like a pregnant woman whose Ubar protrudes outside her
body.
Ohr Pnimi
84. Protrude and exit Olam Atzilut like a pregnant woman whose Ubar
protrudes outside her body.
This is the meaning of the Ibur of the Ir presented in Masechet Iruvin.
When you come to measure the zones you do not measure from the
wall of the city but go seventy Amah and some margins and begin to
measure from there. These seventy Amah are called the Ibur of the Ir,
considered as though they are still within the wall of the city.
The Rav says that these lower six of Assiya that remained below
Parsa de Atzilut in the place of the first six of the current Beria are
considered to have remained as one Guf with Olam Atzilut. It is like a
pregnant woman whose Ubar and Beten protrude outside her Guf.
This is the meaning of the Ibur of the Ir, which is considered like the
Ir itself although already outside the wall.
We must understand these words. How can you say that the last six de
Assiya are one Guf with the Atzilut when Parsa interrupts between
them? How are these first six of Beria different than the rest of the
Sefirot de BYA, and also, what is the resemblance to the Ibur of an Ir?
The thing is that Parsa is the Behinat Sium on Ohr Atzilut that is made
at half the Tifferet, which is Bina de Guf by the power of the ascent of
the Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey Eynaim, which occurred during the
emergence of the Nekudim. As a result, Malchut ha Mizdaveget,
meaning the Peh of the Rosh rose to Nikvey Eynaim, which is Bina de
Rosh. Then the Eser Sefirot de Rosh came out from Bina upward, and
the Eser Sefirot from above downward into Behinat Guf expanded
from Nikvey Eynaim downward.
The AHP of the Rosh went outside the Rosh and were contained in
Behinat Guf and Malchut ha Mesayemet that prior to that stood in the
Etzbaot Raglaim, rose from there to the place of Bina de Guf, called
Tifferet, meaning to the Chazeh. There at the Chazeh she ended the

--- PAGE 767 ---
Partzuf and the two thirds Tifferet and ZON remained below the Sium
of the Partzuf, meaning below Atzilut (see above Ohr Pnimi items 2
and 3).
This is indeed difficult since the Hey Tata’a rose to Bina, only the
Hotem Peh should have gone outside the Sium of Atzilut since the
Zivug was made in Bina. Why did the Hey Tata’a rise in the middle of
Bina, meaning under GAR de Bina, by which the ZAT de Bina herself
went outside the Rosh and outside Atzilut?
Indeed this is the meaning of “Abba took Ima out for her son and
Abba himself was corrected with Dechura and Nukva.” This is
because GAR de Bina are called YESHSUT. Malchut rose in GAR de
Bina and Abba himself was corrected there in Dechura and Nukva,
which is the meaning of Eynaim and Nikvey Eynaim. Hence, the
Awzen, which is ZAT de Bina, called YESHSUT, went outside the Rosh
into Behinat Guf.
Also, the two thirds of Tifferet, which are Behinat ZAT de Bina de Guf,
called YESHSUT went out of Atzilut because of that. This correction
was in order to provide Mochin for ZA which is the son of YESHSUT.
Had YESHSUT not gone outside, there would have been no presence
of Mochin for ZA (see item 33).
Thus you find that from the aspect of the ascent of the Hey Tata’a in
the Eynaim only, ZAT de Bina did not have to go outside Parsa de
Atzilut. This is the meaning of the two lower thirds of Tifferet that
were made into Olam Beria.
However, this was a special Tikun by Upper AVI who took the Hey
Tata’a within them in order to eject ZAT de Bina outside the Rosh and
outside Atzilut so as to provide Mochin for ZA. Hence, YESHSUT are
considered the Beten of AVI, protruding outside the Guf de AVI.
Yet, they are still considered as the Guf de AVI itself because this is
the protrusion and the exit outside the Guf de AVI. It is not because of
a flaw in them, but only for her Ubar, being ZA who did not have
Mochin anyhow.

--- PAGE 768 ---
Thus, the place of Olam Beria was made of two thirds of Tifferet,
which are ZAT de Bina de Guf that remained below the Parsa and
expanded to Eser Sefirot de Beria. The First seven are Behinat ZAT de
Bina and from the Chazeh downward they are Behinat ZON.
Hence, these First seven of Beria, which are KHBD HGT through the
Chazeh, are already under the Parsa de Atzilut. Yet, since they do not
exit Atzilut because of their own flaw but in order to give Mochin to
ZON, they are regarded as being from the Parsa upward, inside
Atzilut.
It is rather like a pregnant woman where the Ubar protrudes
outwardly, meaning as the Beten protrudes outside the Guf in a
pregnant woman, which is not because of her, but because of the Ubar
in her. Similarly, the exit of these First seven of Beria outside Atzilut
is because of the Ubar in her, which is ZON to whom she wants to
give Mochin. It turns out, that in herself she is still Guf de Atzilut,
although she protrudes and exits below Parsa de Atzilut, as this is not
because of a flaw.
Now you can also see the meaning of the Ibur of the Ir, which is not
included in the two thousand Amah of the Shabbat Zone. The Ir means
Olam Atzilut, as written in Ohr Pnimi item 62. On the day of the
Shabbat all the Olamot are in the form of Atzilut and the zone of the
two thousand Amah are opposite the two Sefirot ZON de Hitzoniut of
the place of BYA which cannot rise to Atzilut. They remain below
Parsa, empty without Ohr.
They are in the place of Rosh and Atzilut de Kelim since there is an
opposite value between the Kelim and the Orot. Although Rosh and
Atzilut of the place of BYA are Keter and Hochma from the aspect of
the Kelim, they are ZA and Nukva from the aspect of the Orot.
Hence, these two thousand Amah are not measured from near the city
wall, which is Parsa de Atzilut, but we leave and add seventy Amah
and some margins, opposite these seven Sefirot de Beria KHBD HGT
and the Chazeh. Each Sefira contains ten and the Behinat Chazeh is
the “margins”.

--- PAGE 769 ---
These seven Sefirot de Beria are still discerned as Guf de Atzilut and
the matter of their protrusion outside Olam Atzilut resembles a
protrusion of a Beten outside a woman’s Guf, which is not because of
her, but because of the fetus. For this reason we measure the Shabbat
Zone only from Chazeh de Beria downward until the general Chazeh
of the place of BYA.
It is written, “these bottom six protrude and exit Olam Atzilut like a
pregnant woman etc.” He wishes to say that even the bottom six of
Assiya that remained then below Parsa inside the place of the First six
of the current Beria, are also considered to have been in Atzilut. This
is because the place of these First seven de Beria is discerned as the
actual Ibur of the Ir, meaning like a pregnant woman.
85. Now you find that the bottom four de Beria and the entire Olam
Yetzira and Assiya which are the place of twenty-four Sefirot were
then all vacant, empty and Halal. It was in the form of Shabbat
Zone, which is two thousand Amah except for the last fourteen
Sefirot, which became a permanent section for the Klipot. The
other ten Upper Sefirot were in the form of Shabbat Zone.
Ohr Pnimi
85. Permanent section for the Klipot.
This is so because she has only temporary residence in all three
Olamot BYA, as it is written in the Zohar: “Ima nests in Kursaya, ZA
nests in Yetzira and Malchut nests in the Ofan.” Nesting means
temporary residence. The reason is that on Shabbats and Good Days
they return to their place in Atzilut, and BYA remains completely
empty of Kedusha.
Yet, the Klipot that have acquired permanent residence from the
Chazeh de BYA downward never leave there throughout the six
thousand years. They do not leave there even on Shabbats and Good
Days.
However, regarding the first sixteen Sefirot de BYA from the Chazeh
upward, after the sin the Klipot built a great construction. It is written,

--- PAGE 770 ---
“God hath made even the one as well as the other,” and they occupy
their share in the first sixteen Sefirot too throughout Komat BYA.
However, they do not have permanent residence there since on
Shabbats they must leave the first sixteen Sefirot from the Chazeh up.
This is so because during the ascent of the Olamot on Shabbat these
sixteen Sefirot become completely empty, having neither Kedusha nor
Klipot. Yet, they do not leave from Chazeh de BYA downward even on
Shabbat. This is the meaning of the words of the Rav, “except for the
last fourteen Sefirot, which became a permanent section for the
Klipot.” This means that they never leave there until the end of
correction.
We must understand the reason why the first sixteen are so different
from the last fourteen, and also what is the matter of the permanent
residence and temporary residence which is said both about Kedusha
and about the Klipot.
First we must remember that the place of BYA is one matter and the
Olamot BYA with everything inside them, Kedusha and Klipot, are a
separate matter.
The difference between them is very big because the place of BYA was
made of the Kelim of NHY de Partzuf Nekudot de SAG de AK. They
remained below Parsa by the renewal that occurred there in Tzimtzum
Bet, where the Atzilut ended on the Chazeh of this Partzuf.
You find that the Kelim themselves are from Tzimtzum Aleph but the
renewal of the ascent of the Hey Tata’a in the Nikvey Eynaim lowered
them below Atzilut and they were emptied of their Orot. Thus, the
Kelim of the place of BYA are from Behinat Tzimtzum Aleph, but the
three Olamot BYA and the Partzufim in them, both Kedusha and Klipa,
came primarily from Tzimtzum Bet.
It is so because they came out during the Gadlut de Eser Sefirot de
Olam ha Nekudim with the Hitpashtut of the new Ohr de AB de AK
that lowered the Hey Tata’a back to its place in the Peh de Rosh and
returned the AHP to the Rosh.

--- PAGE 771 ---
Afterwards, when the Mochin expanded from Rosh to ZAT they
lowered the Nekudat Sium too from the place of the Chazeh de Partzuf
Nekudot de SAG to the place of Sium Raglin as before. Then ZAT de
Nekudim expanded through the Nekuda de Olam ha Zeh, equal to the
Raglaim of AK. Since they breached the Gevul of the Parsa that was
made during the Katnut de Nekudim, they broke because of that and
died.
It is known that all four Olamot ABYA of Olam ha Tikun were made of
these ZAT that died as well as ABYA de Klipot because some were
corrected and some were not corrected. ABYA de Kedusha were made
of those that were corrected where the Kelim de Panim became Olam
Atzilut, and the three Olamot BYA were made of the Kelim de
Achoraim.
What remained after ABYA de Kedusha and could not be corrected
was made into ABYA de Klipot, thus both BYA de Kedusha and BYA de
Klipot emerged and were made after Tzimtzum Bet. However, BYA’s
place came out entirely during Tzimtzum Aleph like all the Partzufim
of AK, and Tzimtzum Bet only diminished it to lower it outside Atzilut.
The reason that some were corrected and some were not corrected is
that the breaking of the vessels was because Malchut de Tzimtzum
Aleph that became a vacant Halal, became Av again in Kelim de ZAT,
as they crossed the Gevul of the Parsa. Hence, only the First nine
Sefirot of each Melech of the ZAT could be sorted, but Malchut of
every Melech could not be sorted since she was in Behinat vacant
Halal from Tzimtzum Aleph.
However, because of their breaking, all the Behinot were mixed with
one another and each Behina that is sorted and rises from BYA has 320
Nitzotzin, which are all seven Melachim. This is so because with
Melech ha Daat they are eight Melachim. Each Melech contains Eser
Sefirot, and in each Sefira there are four Behinot HB TM, thus 320.
Since Malchut in each Eser Sefirot was not sorted you find that there
are eight Malchuiot here where in each Malchut there are four Behinot
HB TM, which are thirty-two Nitzotzin. This is the meaning of Lev ha

--- PAGE 772 ---
Even, since these thirty-two Nitzotzin of the Malchuiot are considered
the vacant Halal of Tzimtzum Aleph. They are unfit for any correction
and must be separated from the Kelim. Without it, it is impossible to
revive them.
It turns out that they are 320 Nitzotzin in general, but only the first
nine of them can be sorted and revived, which are the 248 Nitzotzin.
The Malchuiot among them are the thirty-two Nitzotzin and have no
Tikun at all and must be separated from the Kelim, as it is written,
“and I will remove the stony heart out of their flesh.”
Hence, the place of BYA, which is TNHY de Nekudot SAG de AK was
divided into two Behinot in the same manner, its First nine and the
Malchut in it. In itself it expanded into Eser Sefirot HBD HGT NHYM.
All first nine in it HBD HGT through the Chazeh stand where Orot
clothe the Kelim, and only its Malchut stands from the Chazeh
downward (Ohr Pnimi item 3). It turns out that everything that fell to
its Behinat Malchut which is from its Chazeh down is not suitable for
sorting because they are Behinat Lev ha Even.
It is written, “the last fourteen Sefirot, which became a permanent
section for the Klipot.” It means that the Klipot do not leave there
even on Shabbat because there is Behinat Malchut of the place of BYA
where Lev ha Even fell, which cannot be corrected throughout the six
thousand years.
It turns out that the Klipot do not move from there and acquire
permanent residence there though the sixteen Upper Sefirot from the
Chazeh upward in the place of the 248 Nitzotzin rise on Shabbat. At
that time they become Atzilut once more and the Klipot that are
opposite the 248 Nitzotzin all cancel on the day of Shabbat. Hence,
that place became completely empty then and has neither Kedusha nor
Klipa.
We divide the place of BYA and say that from the Behinat Kelim, HBD
HGT through the Chazeh is considered the Behinat Keter Hochma in
it, meaning Rosh and Atzilut. Also, from the Behinat Hitlabshut of the

--- PAGE 773 ---
Orot in the Kelim, all nine Sefirot in it are considered to be in HBD
HGT through the Chazeh, and only Malchut is from the Chazeh down.
Similarly, all the Olamot are divided in the same manner because the
nine Sefirot of the first Olamot in general are in AK and Atzilut
through the Parsa, where Nukva de ZA is. From Parsa down there is
nothing of the nine original Sefirot, only the Hitpashtut of Nukva de
ZA, meaning Malchut alone.
All these Partzufim de BYA are Behinat Ohr of Tolada. Yet, from the
Behinat Hitpashtut Orot in the Kelim from Parsa downward it is
considered to be the three Olamot BYA, which are the three Komot
Bina and ZON while AK and Atzilut are considered as merely Keter
and Hochma. In other words, it is just as we have said in the two
discernments of the place of BYA and also in every single item,
because everything that exists in the general always abides in the
particular too, even in the very last item.
You find that there are two Behinot of Eser Sefirot: the original Eser
Sefirot and Eser Sefirot of Ohr of Tolada. The Sium of the original
nine Sefirot is in Malchut de Atzilut and the Sium of the nine Sefirot or
the Ohr of Tolada is in the place of Chazeh of the place of BYA that
ends there, and remember that.
This is only according to the state of BYA in the first Behina that the
Rav wrote here, which is the permanent state of BYA. What they
acquired in the second Behina and in the third Behina is an addition in
them.
Also, the descent that the Olamot descended afterwards because of the
sin of Adam ha Rishon and the last four of Yetzira and the Eser Sefirot
of Assiya that descended from the Chazeh of the place of BYA
downward is the matter of the great lessening and descent from their
permanent state. It is considered as Hitlabshut of Kedusha in Klipot
because from the Chazeh of the place of BYA downward it is the place
of the Klipot.
OceanofPDF.com